[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 119 (Tuesday, June 23, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 37309-37314]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12645]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

Office of the Secretary of Labor

29 CFR Part 38

RIN 1291-AA47

Rescission of Affirmative Outreach Requirements for Recipients of 
WIOA Title I Financial Assistance

AGENCY: Office of the Secretary, Labor.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Department of Labor (Department) rescinds the regulatory 
affirmative outreach requirements on recipients of financial assistance 
under Title I of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) 
and makes conforming edits.

DATES: Effective July 24, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Naomi Barry-Perez, Director, Civil 
Rights Center (CRC), U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue 
NW, Room N-4123, Washington, DC 20210. Telephone: (202) 693-6500 
(voice) (this is not a toll-free number). If you are deaf, hard of 
hearing, or have a speech disability, please dial 7-1-1 to access 
telecommunications relay services.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Background

    Section 188 of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA), 
29 U.S.C. 3248 (Section 188), establishes nondiscrimination 
requirements for programs and activities receiving financial assistance 
under Title I of WIOA.
    Subsection (a)(1) of Section 188 provides that, for the purpose of 
applying prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of age, 
disability, sex, or race, color, or national origin, WIOA-funded 
programs are to be treated as programs receiving Federal financial 
assistance under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et 
seq.), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) 
(Section 504), Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 
1681 et seq.) (Title IX), and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
(42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.) (Title VI). 29 U.S.C. 3248(a)(1). Subsection 
(a)(2) prohibits discrimination in WIOA Title I programs on the basis 
of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, or 
political affiliation or belief. 29 U.S.C. 3248(a)(2). Finally, 
subsection (e) directs the Secretary of Labor to issue regulations that 
adopt standards for determining discrimination and procedures for 
enforcement that are consistent with the Acts referred to in subsection 
(a)(1).
    Pursuant to subsection (e), in 2016, the Department promulgated 29 
CFR 38.40, which requires recipients of WIOA Title I financial 
assistance to ``take appropriate steps to ensure that they are 
providing equal access to their WIOA Title I-financially assisted 
programs and activities,'' which should involve ``reasonable efforts'' 
to conduct affirmative outreach to different demographic groups, 
``including but not limited to persons of different sexes, various 
racial and ethnic/national origin groups, various religions, 
individuals with limited English proficiency, individuals with 
disabilities, and individuals in different age groups.'' The rule 
provided examples of outreach efforts that recipients might undertake. 
``Recipients'' are defined in 29 CFR 38.4(zz) as entities to which 
financial

[[Page 37310]]

assistance under Title I of WIOA is extended, directly from the 
Department or through the Governor or another recipient (including any 
successor, assignee, or transferee of a recipient).
    On July 1, 2025, the Department proposed to rescind 29 CFR 38.40 on 
the grounds that it exceeded statutory authority. Rescission of 
Affirmative Outreach Requirements for Recipients of WIOA Title I 
Financial Assistance, 90 FR 28245 (proposed July 1, 2025). The 
Department was further concerned that a government mandate to conduct 
affirmative outreach based on race and ethnicity creates tension with 
the Constitution's Equal Protection principles. Id. Voluntary outreach 
programs would still be permitted under the Department's proposal.

II. Discussion

    The Department received 84 comments on the proposed rule. Eighty-
three commenters opposed rescission, including national and local 
disability rights organizations, civil rights groups, a labor union, 
and advocacy organizations. Several commenters represent organizations 
that are engaged by WIOA recipients to assist with or perform 
affirmative outreach activities mandated by the current regulation. 
These commenters argued that affirmative outreach is necessary to 
ensure meaningful nondiscrimination, contending that without 
affirmative efforts many individuals will never learn of or benefit 
from WIOA-funded services. After reviewing and carefully considering 
all comments, as well as considering alternatives to rescission, the 
Department has decided to finalize the rescission as proposed because 
it concludes that it lacks statutory authority to enforce an 
affirmative outreach provision.

A. The Department's Statutory Authority

    Several commenters contended that WIOA's statement of purpose, 29 
U.S.C. 3101(1), reflects a congressional goal of increasing access to 
workforce-development services for individuals with barriers to 
employment, and that this goal supports interpreting Section 188 to 
authorize mandatory affirmative outreach requirements based on race, 
sex, religion, disability status, and other demographic 
characteristics.
    The Department does not dispute that WIOA's purpose clause 
expresses broad and aspirational objectives, nor does it question that 
recipients remain free to undertake voluntary outreach efforts that 
further those objectives. However, a statutory statement of purpose 
does not itself confer regulatory authority. Courts have repeatedly 
rejected efforts to derive legal authority from general purpose 
provisions.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Yazoo & M.V.R. Co. v. Thomas, 132 U.S. 174, 188 (1889); 
Ass'n of Am. R.R.s v. Costle, 562 F.2d 1310, 1316 (D.C. Cir. 1977); 
Antonin Scalia & Brian Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of 
Legal Texts, 217 (2012) (``[A] congressional expression of purpose 
has as much real-world effect as a congressional expression of 
apology.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Accordingly, WIOA's purpose clause cannot expand the scope of the 
Department's authority beyond the specific delegation contained in the 
Act's operative provisions. The Department's authority to promulgate 
regulations is limited to Section 188, which does not reference or 
mandate outreach. Other operative provisions within the statute do 
reference or mandate outreach, and comparing these provisions 
demonstrate that Congress knew how to require affirmative outreach when 
it intended to do so; its omission of such language in Section 188 is 
instructive.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ As some commenters, such as CommunicationFIRST, have noted, 
the word ``outreach'' is referenced in other parts of WIOA. For 
example, 29 U.S.C. 3111(d)(3)(C) requires States to develop 
``strategies for providing effective outreach to and improved access 
for individuals and employers who could benefit from services 
provided through the workforce development system.'' But this merely 
demonstrates that Congress knows how to enact an outreach 
requirement--and when it did, Congress framed mandatory outreach in 
term of ``access for individuals,'' and not demographic groups as 
Sec.  38.40 does. In any event, Congress did not include any 
outreach requirement in WIOA's nondiscrimination provisions and 
instead directed the Department to issue regulations consistent with 
civil rights statutes that define unlawful discrimination in terms 
of intentional or deliberate conduct, not the absence of affirmative 
conduct. See Southeastern Community College v. Davis 442 U.S. 397, 
405, 410-11 (1979) (comparing provisions of the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973 and finding distinctions purposeful).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Here, the operative provision is Section 188, which prohibits 
unlawful discrimination and directs the Department to adopt standards 
for determining unlawful discrimination and procedures for enforcement 
that are consistent with four enumerated civil-rights statutes: the Age 
Discrimination Act of 1975 (age), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973 (disability), Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 
(sex), and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (race, color, or 
national origin). Under the majority of those statutes, the standard 
for a determination of unlawful discrimination is intentional disparate 
treatment, and none of them mandate affirmative conduct such as 
proactive outreach to address perceived imbalances in access among 
protected groups.
    Because section 188(e) requires the Department's regulatory 
standards for determining discrimination to be consistent with those 
statutes, the Department lacks authority to treat the absence of 
affirmative outreach efforts as a new form of unlawful discrimination. 
Under the best reading of section 188(e), the Department's authority is 
confined to the same definitions of discrimination that apply under 
Title VI, Title IX, Section 504, and the Age Discrimination Act. 
Nothing in WIOA's text authorizes the Department to redefine unlawful 
discrimination to include failure to undertake affirmative outreach 
efforts toward ``persons of different sexes, various racial and ethnic/
national origin groups, various religions, individuals with limited 
English proficiency, individuals with disabilities, and individuals in 
different age groups,'' as former Sec.  38.40 requires.
    Commenters also argued that affirmative outreach is necessary to 
give practical effect to Section 188's nondiscrimination protections 
because individuals with barriers to employment may not otherwise learn 
of WIOA services. The Department disagrees. Nondiscrimination and 
outreach are distinct concepts. Recipients may fully comply with 
Section 188 by refraining from differential treatment on prohibited 
grounds, without undertaking the outreach activities described in 
former Sec.  38.40. Although outreach may advance broader workforce-
development goals and may be beneficial in practice, the Department 
cannot redefine nondiscrimination to require proactive measures absent 
statutory authorization.
    Nothing in this final rule prevents recipients of WIOA Title I 
financial assistance from voluntarily engaging in outreach to broaden 
awareness of their programs, and the Department anticipates that many 
recipients will continue to do so. Such voluntary efforts may be useful 
tools to promote inclusivity and to raise awareness regarding the 
availability of WIOA services, as some commenters have suggested. 
Indeed, the Department itself conducts outreach, particularly with 
respect to American workers with disabilities, and permits and 
encourages recipients to use WIOA funds to recruit program 
participants, such as individuals with low-income status or limited 
English proficiency. The sole question addressed here is whether 
Section 188 authorizes the Department to enforce such practices as a 
matter of law. For the reasons stated above, it does not. The decision 
whether and how to conduct affirmative outreach rests with recipients, 
not with the Department. The Department

[[Page 37311]]

considered revising Sec.  38.40 instead of rescinding it but determined 
that any revision would still give the appearance of requiring 
affirmative outreach to particular demographic groups and would not 
cure the lack of support in the operative provision of the authorizing 
statute. By rescinding Sec.  38.40, the Department ensures that 
recipients remain free to adopt outreach strategies best suited to 
their circumstances, without being subject to coercive regulation that 
lacks statutory foundation and risks constitutional conflict.

B. Equal Protection Principles

    The NPRM expressed concern that mandating affirmative outreach may 
create tension with equal-protection principles. For instance, Sec.  
38.40 requires recipients to consider race and ethnicity when designing 
outreach efforts and thus may trigger strict scrutiny. The canon of 
constitutional avoidance therefore reinforces the Department's 
conclusion to interpret section 188 not to mandate recipients to engage 
in race-conscious affirmative outreach.
    Several commenters, including the NAACP and AFL-CIO, asserted that 
Sec.  38.40 is race-neutral because it applies uniformly to all 
protected groups listed in the regulation and does not require 
recipients to give a preference to any particular demographic group. 
These commenters argued that the provision merely requires broad 
dissemination of information and does not impose differential treatment 
based on race, sex, national origin, or any other protected 
characteristic.
    The Department disagrees that the regulation, which explicitly 
states that recipients ``must take appropriate steps'' that ``should 
involve reasonable efforts to include members of . . . various racial 
and ethnic/national origin groups,'' is race-neutral. That formulation 
inherently directs recipients to identify racial and ethnic categories 
and to structure their outreach efforts with reference to race and 
ethnicity. A regulatory requirement that turns on racial 
classifications is not rendered neutral simply because it does not 
single out one group for disparate treatment. If, in an effort to 
comply with Sec.  38.40, a WIOA recipient targets outreach to a 
particular racial group that would otherwise not have been targeted, 
that is a race-conscious decision resulting from a government mandate. 
A regulation requiring affirmative outreach to ``various racial . . . 
groups'' is therefore race-conscious.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ The same logic applies with respect to other protected 
characteristics: sex, religion, disability status, etc. The degree 
of constitutional scrutiny for sex and disability status is 
different for race and religion. But a requirement to conduct 
outreach to different sexes is still obviously sex-conscious.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Nor does the fact that the regulation concerns outreach rather 
than, for example, admission or hiring, render it race neutral, as some 
courts have suggested. See Peightal v. Metro Dade Cnty., 26 F.3d 1545, 
1557-58 (11th Cir. 1994) (characterizing in dicta as ``race neutral'' 
the city's policy to ``provide information to and solicit applications 
from young minorities''). Indeed, NAACP's comment quotes approvingly to 
language in Justice Kennedy's concurrence in Parents Involved in 
Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1 recognizing that an 
outreach policy to attract students and faculty of different races ``in 
a targeted fashion'' would be ``race conscious.'' 551 U.S. 701, 789 
(2007) (Kennedy, J., concurring).
    To be sure, NAACP correctly notes that Justice Kennedy's 
concurrence continued to state that such race-conscious outreach ``is 
unlikely [to] demand strict scrutiny,'' id, and certain lower court 
decisions have agreed.\4\ Those cases, however, did not involve a 
federal mandate requiring regulated entities to tailor outreach based 
on demographic categories that include race and ethnicity. The D.C. 
Circuit applied strict scrutiny to one such mandate and held it 
unconstitutional in MD/DC/DE Broadcasters Association v. FCC.\5\ 
Although the rule at issue in that that case explicitly incentivized 
recruitment for women and minorities and involved additional 
requirements beyond outreach alone--including reporting and 
enforcement--the Department need not resolve whether those distinctions 
would ultimately be constitutionally significant here. Rather, the 
canon of constitutional avoidance counsels against interpreting Section 
188 to authorize a race-conscious regulatory mandate that raises 
constitutional concerns in the first instance. See Edward J. DeBartolo 
Corp. v. Fla. Gulf Coast Bldg. & Constr. Trades Council, 485 U.S. 568, 
575 (1988) (``[W]here an otherwise acceptable construction of a statute 
would raise serious constitutional problems, the Court will construe 
the statute to avoid such problems unless such construction is plainly 
contrary to the intent of Congress.'' (citing NLRB v. Catholic Bishop 
of Chi., 440 U.S. 490, 499-501, 504 (1979)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ See Allen v. Alabama State Bd. of Educ., 164 F.3d 1347 (11th 
Cir. 1999), vacated, 216 F.3d 1263 (11th Cir. 2000); Shuford v. Ala. 
State Bd. of Educ., 897 F. Supp. 1535, 1551-52 (M.D. Ala. 1995).
    \5\ MD/DC/DE Broadcasters Ass'n v. FCC, 236 F.3d 13 (D.C. Cir. 
2001), cert. denied, 534 U.S. 1113 (2002).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Several commenters, including ASAN, the NAACP, and NPWF, argued 
that the Department's reliance in the NPRM on Students for Fair 
Admissions v. Harvard is misplaced because that decision arose in the 
context of higher-education admissions.\6\ The Department agrees that 
SFFA involved a different factual context. Nonetheless, the decision 
reaffirmed the broader constitutional principle that race-conscious 
governmental requirements are subject to strict scrutiny. The Court 
declared without qualification that ``[r]acial classifications are 
simply too pernicious to permit any but the most exact connection 
between justification and classification.'' \7\ Section 38.40 requires 
recipients to consider race and ethnicity when developing outreach 
policy and therefore constitutes a race-conscious governmental 
requirement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \6\ See 600 U.S. 181 (2023).
    \7\ Id. at 217 (quoting Gratz v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 244, 270 
(2003)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    To be clear, the Department does not opine on the ultimate 
constitutionality of such a mandate. Rather, the Department interprets 
Section 188 in a manner that avoids that constitutional question, 
particularly where that interpretation is supported by the best reading 
of the statutory text. Any potential conflict between Sec.  38.40 and 
equal-protection principles is not an independent basis for rescission 
but instead reinforces the Department's conclusion that Section 188 
does not authorize mandatory affirmative outreach. Of course, voluntary 
outreach efforts to the groups listed at section 38.40 remain 
permissible and often encouraged.

C. Effects of Rescission

    Some commenters expressed concern that rescinding Sec.  38.40 will 
reduce awareness of WIOA Title I services among individuals with 
disabilities, individuals with limited English proficiency, displaced 
homemakers, returning citizens, and other individuals facing barriers 
to employment. These commenters provided data showing disparities 
between groups in employment and WIOA participation. However, they did 
not offer analysis demonstrating that these disparities are caused by, 
or would be exacerbated by, the absence of mandatory outreach 
requirements.
    As a general matter, the Department believes commenters' 
predictions of practical effects are overstated because recipients 
remain free to engage in voluntary outreach efforts to the

[[Page 37312]]

aforementioned groups. Moreover, since the adoption of Sec.  38.40 in 
2016, the Department has not initiated a single enforcement action 
predicated on a recipient's failure to conduct affirmative outreach. 
Given that the mandate has not been enforced in practice, the 
Department does not expect that rescission will disrupt recipients' 
operations or materially alter the delivery of WIOA services.
    Several disability-rights organizations--including The Arc, ASAN, 
PACER Center, CommunicationFIRST, and Detroit Disability Power--argued 
that individuals with disabilities often face unique and significant 
barriers to learning about available workforce services. The Department 
acknowledges that outreach can serve important programmatic purposes 
and that individuals with disabilities and other groups may face 
substantial challenges in accessing information about available 
services. The Department agrees that recipients may communicate 
proactively with these communities to promote awareness of WIOA 
opportunities. Nothing in this final rule prevents such outreach. 
Recipients retain full discretion to continue, expand, or redesign 
their current outreach efforts, including outreach specifically 
intended to engage individuals with disabilities, individuals with 
limited English proficiency, and others. Recipients may also continue 
to partner with disability organizations, schools, VR agencies, and 
other community-based entities should they choose to do so.
    As noted previously, the Department itself through its Office of 
Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) regularly conducts outreach to job 
seekers with disabilities, promoting services available through the 
public workforce system. ODEP funds two WIOA technical assistance 
centers, the National Center on Leadership for the Employment and 
Economic Advancement of People with Disabilities (LEAD Center) and the 
Center for Advancing Policy on Employment for Youth (CAPE-Youth). These 
centers provide training to workforce system staff to build their 
knowledge in successfully serving jobseekers with disabilities in a 
variety of career pathways and conduct outreach directly to individuals 
with disabilities. ODEP also administers initiatives that require 
contractors and grantees to connect individuals to the workforce 
system. For example, the Retaining Employment and Talent after Injury/
Illness Network (RETAIN) demonstration grants recruits and helps 
thousands of ill or injured workers remain in the workforce by 
providing coordinated health and employment services delivered through 
the workforce system. The National Expansion of Employment 
Opportunities Network (NEON) initiative conducts outreach to and 
connects individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities 
(I/DD) and those with mental health conditions to workforce, education, 
developmental disabilities, and Medicaid systems. However, the question 
under section 188(e) is whether the Department is authorized to mandate 
such outreach as a legal requirement of nondiscrimination. As explained 
elsewhere in this preamble, the Department has concluded that section 
188(e) incorporates the definitions of discrimination contained in 
Title VI, Title IX, Section 504, and the Age Discrimination Act. None 
of these statutes has been interpreted to define unlawful 
discrimination to include a failure to perform proactive outreach to 
particular demographic groups. Accordingly, even though outreach may be 
permissible and beneficial in some instances when performed on a 
voluntary basis, Section 188 does not provide the Department with the 
legal authority to enforce such outreach.
    Commenters expressed concern that eliminating Sec.  38.40 may 
undermine coordination between WIOA programs and other programs such as 
state VR agencies, youth transition programs, TANF programs, or adult-
education providers. Commenters pointed to WIOA provisions that 
encourage or require coordination across programs and argued that 
outreach obligations help support these statutory expectations.
    The Department appreciates the importance of coordination across 
workforce and education systems and encourages recipients to continue 
collaborating with VR and other partner programs. This rescission does 
not diminish or alter recipients' statutory duties under other 
provisions of WIOA. Recipients must still comply with Titles I-IV, the 
implementing regulations, and joint guidance concerning referrals, 
coordination, and integrated service delivery. Recipients remain free 
to use outreach as a tool to fulfill these other statutory duties. The 
rescission simply clarifies that the Department cannot impose an 
additional nondiscrimination requirement that mandates outreach 
obligations under Section 188. Indeed, many of the Department's grant 
programs, include unemployment, poverty, or low-income status as 
eligibility criteria for participants and awardees. Furthermore, State 
Workforce Agencies, State Workforce Boards, American Job Centers 
(AJCs), and WIOA funding recipients regularly engage in outreach 
activities to reach different categories of people which often include 
high-unemployment or low-income participants. And 2 CFR 200.421 
specifically allows grantees to use funds to recruit program 
participants and to engage businesses by communicating with them. The 
AJC brand itself was created to increase program awareness of the 
services the public workforce system offers and to facilitate outreach. 
This WIOA program is delivered through AJCs nationwide and there are 
approximately 2,400 AJCs, all of which provide the public a one-stop-
shop for employment services.
    Some commenters--including Chicago Jobs Council, PACER, and NCLD--
asserted that Sec.  38.40 provides helpful ``clarity'' and ``a 
framework'' for recipients, and that removing it could create 
uncertainty regarding how recipients should ensure equal access. 
Commenters argued that rescission may increase recipients' compliance 
burden by eliminating explicit examples of outreach practices.
    The Department acknowledges that Sec.  38.40 supplied a non-
exhaustive list of outreach activities that recipients ``might 
undertake.'' However, Sec.  38.40 imposed a federal mandate to conduct 
outreach with reference to protected demographic categories, and for 
the reasons described elsewhere, the Department lacks statutory 
authority to impose such a requirement. Recipients retain broad 
flexibility to design outreach strategies that fit their operational 
needs and may continue to use any practices previously informed by 
Sec.  38.40. Because the rescission removes a federal mandate rather 
than prohibiting outreach, the Department concludes that the rescission 
does not impose new burdens on recipients.

D. Other Concerns

    Several commenters asserted that the Department did not adequately 
justify its departure from the 2016 rule. They argued that the 2016 
interpretation reflected a permissible reading of Section 188 and that 
the NPRM did not provide a sufficient reason to adopt a different view. 
The Department disagrees. The NPRM acknowledged the change from the 
2016 rule and explained that, upon further review of section 188(e) and 
the four statutes it incorporates, the Department now concludes that 
those statutes do not authorize the Department to mandate proactive 
outreach. After Loper Bright, agencies must adopt the ``best reading''

[[Page 37313]]

of statutory text rather than rely on judicial deference or custom. The 
Department has determined that the best reading of Section 188 confines 
its authority to standards consistent with the four referenced 
statutes, none of which defines discrimination to include failure to 
undertake affirmative outreach. The Department therefore has a reasoned 
basis for its change in position.
    Several commenters, including PACER and Chicago Jobs Council, 
argued that the Department failed to consider reliance interests 
allegedly created by the 2016 rule, including reliance by recipients, 
state workforce agencies, disability-rights organizations, and outreach 
partners.
    The Department disagrees. Recipients remain free to continue 
affirmative outreach activities on a voluntary basis, including 
collaborations with community organizations and targeted dissemination 
of information. The only effect of this rule is that recipients are no 
longer compelled to structure outreach around protected 
classifications. Because recipients retain full discretion to continue 
the very practices on which commenters claim to rely, the rescission 
does not impair any legitimate reliance interest. Moreover, reliance 
interests cannot expand an agency's statutory authority. Even if some 
entities preferred the 2016 approach, the Department may not preserve a 
regulatory requirement that exceeds the limits Congress established in 
section 188(e).

E. Summary of Revisions

    For the foregoing reasons, the Department is rescinding 29 CFR 
38.40 in its entirety. The Department is also making the following 
conforming edits to remove references to Sec.  38.40: Removing the 
phrase ``consistent with Sec.  38.40'' from Sec.  38.31(e); Removing 
Sec.  38.54(c)(1)(v), which requires a State's nondiscrimination plan 
to describe how it complies with the affirmative outreach requirements 
at Sec.  38.40; and Revising Sec.  38.54(c)(2)(viii)(F) to say 
``Sec. Sec.  38.34 through 38.39'' instead of ``Sec. Sec.  38.34 
through 38.40.''

III. Procedural Issues and Regulatory Review

A. Executive Orders 12866, 13563, and 14192

    Among other requirements, Executive Order 12866 requires agencies 
to submit ``significant regulatory actions'' to the Office of 
Management and Budget's (OMB) Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (OIRA) for review. See 58 FR 51735 (Oct. 4, 1993). Section 3(f) 
of E.O. 12866 defines a ``significant regulatory action'' as a 
regulatory action that is likely to result in a rule that may: (1) have 
an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more, or adversely 
affect in a material way a sector of the economy, productivity, 
competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or state, 
local, or tribal governments or communities; (2) create serious 
inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by 
another agency; (3) materially alter the budgetary impact of 
entitlements, grants, user fees or loan programs or the rights and 
obligations of recipients thereof; or (4) raise novel legal or policy 
issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or 
the principles set forth in the Executive Order. OIRA has determined 
that this rule does not constitute a ``significant regulatory action'' 
under section 3(f) of E.O. 12866. Accordingly, this rule was not 
submitted to OIRA for review under E.O. 12866.
    Executive Order 13563 directs agencies to, among other things, 
propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that 
its benefits justify its costs; the regulation is tailored to impose 
the least burden on society, consistent with achieving the regulatory 
objectives; and in choosing among alternative regulatory approaches, 
the agency has selected those approaches that maximize net benefits. 
See 76 FR 3821 (Jan. 21, 2011). E.O. 13563 recognizes that some costs 
and benefits are difficult to quantify and provides that, where 
appropriate and permitted by law, agencies may consider and discuss 
qualitative values that are difficult or impossible to quantify, 
including equity, human dignity, fairness, and distributive impacts. 
Id.
    The Department has considered the requirements of E.O. 13563 and 
has determined that the benefits of this proposed rescission justify 
any associated costs. The principal benefit of this action is the 
removal of a regulatory requirement that is not authorized by statute. 
Although these benefits are not readily quantifiable in economic terms, 
ensuring that agency action remains within statutory limits promotes 
limited constitutional government and individual liberty.
    The Department further concludes that this rescission would impose 
no compliance costs because it removes, rather than imposes, a 
regulatory obligation and does not prohibit voluntary outreach efforts. 
Any regulatory familiarization costs are expected to be negligible 
because recipients would not need to take action, nor even be aware of 
this rulemaking, to comply with the rescission. Accordingly, the 
Department has determined that the benefits of the proposed action 
outweigh its costs, and that the proposal is consistent with E.O. 
13563.
    Executive Order 14192, titled ``Unleashing Prosperity Through 
Deregulation,'' was issued on January 31, 2025. This final rule is 
expected to be an E.O. 14192 deregulatory action because it reduces 
regulatory burden for recipients of WIOA Title I financial assistance.

B. Final Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) Analysis

    The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (RFA), 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., 
as amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 
1996, Public Law 104-121 (March 29, 1996), requires Federal agencies 
engaged in rulemaking to consider the impact of their rules on small 
entities, consider alternatives to minimize that impact, and solicit 
public comment on their analyses. The RFA requires assessment of the 
impact of a regulation on a wide range of small entities, including 
small businesses, not-for profit organizations, and small governmental 
jurisdictions. Agencies must perform a review to determine whether a 
proposed or final rule would have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities. 5 U.S.C. 603. If the regulatory 
action would have such an impact, then the agency must prepare a 
regulatory flexibility analysis as described in the RFA. See id. 
However, if the agency determines that the regulatory action would not 
be expected to have a significant economic impact on a substantial 
number of small entities, then the head of the agency may so certify 
and the RFA does not require a regulatory flexibility analysis. See 5 
U.S.C. 605. DOL reviewed this rescission under the provisions of the 
RFA and certifies that the impacts of the rescission will not have a 
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities 
because it will not impose any new costs or compel any entities to 
change their current practices.

C. Paperwork Reduction Act

    This rescission imposes no new information or record-keeping 
requirements. Accordingly, OMB clearance is not required under the 
Paperwork Reduction Act. (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.).

[[Page 37314]]

D. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995

    The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (UMRA) requires that 
agencies assess anticipated costs and benefits before issuing any rule 
that would impose spending costs on State, local, or tribal governments 
in the aggregate, or on the private sector, in any 1 year of $100 
million in 1995 dollars, updated annually for inflation. That threshold 
is currently approximately $206 million. This rulemaking will not 
result in the expenditure by State, local, or tribal governments, in 
the aggregate, or by the private sector, in excess of the threshold. 
Thus, no written assessment of unfunded mandates is required.

E. Executive Order 13132 (Federalism)

    This rule will not have substantial direct effects on the States, 
on the relationship between the National Government and the States, or 
on distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels 
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 13132, it 
is determined that this rule does not have sufficient federalism 
implications to warrant preparation of a Federalism Assessment.

F. Executive Order 12250

    Pursuant to Executive Order 12250, the Department of Justice has 
the responsibility to ``review . . . proposed rules . . . of the 
Executive agencies'' implementing nondiscrimination statutes such as 
Title VI, Title IX, and Section 504 in order to identify those which 
are inadequate, unclear or unnecessarily inconsistent.'' The Department 
of Justice has reviewed and approved this rule.

List of Subjects in 29 CFR Part 38

    Administrative practice and procedure, Civil rights, Equal 
employment opportunity, Labor management relations, Manpower training 
programs.

    For the reasons set forth in the preamble, the Department of Labor 
amends 29 CFR part 38 as follows:

PART 38--IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NONDISCRIMINATION AND EQUAL 
OPPORTUNITY PROVISIONS OF THE WORKFORCE INNOVATION AND OPPORTUNITY 
ACT

0
1. The authority citation for part 38 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  29 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.; 29 
U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.; and 20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.

0
2. Amend Sec.  38.31 by revising paragraph (e) to read as follows:

Sec.  38.31  Equal Opportunity Officer responsibilities.

* * * * *
    (e) Conducting outreach and education about equal opportunity and 
nondiscrimination requirements and how an individual may file a 
complaint consistent with Sec.  38.69;
* * * * *

Sec.  38.40  [Removed and Reserved]

0
3. Remove and reserve Sec.  38.40.

0
4. Amend Sec.  38.54 by revising paragraph (c) to read as follows:

Sec.  38.54  Governor's obligations to develop and implement a 
Nondiscrimination Plan.

* * * * *
    (c) * * *
    (1) * * *
    (v) [Reserved]
* * * * *
    (2) * * *
    (viii) * * *
    (F) Copies of any notices made under Sec. Sec.  38.34 through 
38.39.

Dean Heyl,
Assistant Secretary of the Office of Administration and Management.
[FR Doc. 2026-12645 Filed 6-22-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4510-04-P