[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 119 (Tuesday, June 23, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 37319-37321]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12544]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

40 CFR Part 268

[EPA-R08-RCRA-2025-0420; FRL-12863-02-R8]

No-Migration Variance From Land Disposal Restrictions for Clean 
Harbors Grassy Mountain, Utah

AGENCY: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

ACTION: Final approval.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is approving with 
conditions, no-migration variances for four categories/groups of 
wastes, containing up to a combined 250 temporary disposal units (``put 
piles'') at any one time, from the Resource Conservation and Recovery 
Act (RCRA) Land Disposal Restrictions (LDR) standards at Clean Harbors' 
Grassy Mountain (Clean Harbors) commercial treatment, storage and 
disposal facility (TSDF) in Tooele County, Utah. These variances will 
allow Clean Harbors to temporarily store treated hazardous wastes that 
are awaiting LDR compliance verification in put piles within its 
Subtitle C (hazardous waste) landfill. The petitioner demonstrated, to 
a reasonable degree of certainty, that there will be no migration of 
hazardous constituents from the put piles for as long as the wastes 
remain hazardous. Additionally, once LDR compliance is verified, the 
put piles will be disposed within the onsite RCRA hazardous waste 
landfill cell and will be subject to the conditions set out in the 
Compliance Monitoring Plan section of this document.

DATES: The final approval is effective July 23, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jesse Newland; Land, Chemicals and 
Redevelopment Division; EPA Region 8; 1595 Wynkoop Street, Denver, 
Colorado 80202-1129; Mail Code: 8LCR-RC-P; telephone number: (303) 312-
6353; and email:   [email&#160;protected]  .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. General Information

A. Does this document apply to me?

    This action applies only to Clean Harbors' Grassy Mountain Facility 
(Clean Harbors) located in Tooele County, Utah.

B. What action is the Agency taking?

    The EPA is finalizing no-migration variances (NMVs) for up to a 
combined 250 put piles at any one time for the 4 categories/groups of 
wastes identified in The Petition section of this approval as requested 
by Clean Harbors in their July 16, 2024 petition, for the Grassy 
Mountain facility. For the reasons described in the December 31, 2025 
(90 FR 61356) preamble to the proposed approval and in the Agency's 
response to the three comments received on the proposal, the EPA is 
finalizing the variance without alteration. The term of this NMV shall 
be no longer than the term of the RCRA Subtitle C permit for the 
permitted landfill.

C. What is the Agency's authority for taking this action?

    Sections 3004(d) through (g) of the Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 U.S.C. 6294(d) through (g), prohibit the land 
disposal of hazardous wastes unless such wastes meet the LDR treatment 
standards (``treatment standards'') established by EPA (``Agency'').
    However, RCRA 3004(d)(1),\1\ and its implementing regulations found 
at 40 CFR 268.6, provide an option for land disposal of hazardous waste 
that does not meet the applicable treatment standards where EPA has 
approved an NMV petition. Specifically, 40 CFR 268.6(a) describes the 
components that a demonstration of no migration must address; 268.6(b) 
specifies certain criteria that must be satisfied for that 
demonstration, and 268.6(c) describes the monitoring program that will 
be used to verify that the conditions of the NMV are being met.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ RCRA 3004(d)(1)(c) states: ``. . . For the purposes of this 
paragraph, a method of land disposal may not be determined to be 
protective of human health and the environment for a hazardous waste 
referred to in paragraph (2) . . . unless, upon application by an 
interested person, it has been demonstrated to the Administrator, to 
a reasonable degree of certainty, that there will be no migration of 
hazardous constituents from the disposal unit or injection zone for 
as long as the wastes remain hazardous.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

II. Background

A. The Petition

    On July 16, 2024, Clean Harbors submitted an NMV petition to the 
EPA for its Grassy Mountain facility in Tooele County, Utah, seeking an 
exemption from the LDR prohibition on placing hazardous waste on the 
ground if that waste does not meet the prescribed LDR standards of 40 
CFR 268.40, by demonstrating that for as long as the waste remains 
hazardous, there will be no migration of hazardous constituents from 
the disposal units. In response to EPA requests following the original 
November 2023 submission, Clean Harbors provided supplemental 
information for the Agency's evaluation of Clean Harbors' no-migration 
demonstration. The original petition and associated responses to Agency 
information requests (together referred to as ``the petition'') can be 
found in the docket (EPA-R08-RCRA-2025-0420).

III. Summary of Conditions for the NMV

A. Types of Wastes and Maximum Quantity of Put Piles Covered by This 
NMV

    Clean Harbors' no migration demonstration applies to the following 
four categories/groups of wastes stored in up to a combined 250 put 
piles at any one time located within the facility's Subtitle C Landfill 
cell, known as ``Cell 8.''
    (1) general metals (1) general metals (D002, D004-D011);
    (2) cyanide/sulfide with metals (D002, D004 through D011, F006 
through F012, F019);
    (3) high-chromium wastes (D002, D004 through D011, F006);
    (4) ammonia (D002, D004-D011).

B. Duration of Temporary Storage

    While the basis for EPA's final approval is that Clean Harbors 
demonstrated to a reasonable degree of certainty that no hazardous 
constituents will migrate from the put piles for as long as the wastes 
remain hazardous, this NMV is conditioned upon the temporary nature of 
the put piles within Landfill Cell 8 and is intended for situations 
where the put piles are used as part of an overall strategy to confirm 
consistent and compliant treatment that meets the applicable LDR 
treatment standards.
    The Agency concludes that Clean Harbors has provided sufficient 
analytical data to justify a six (6)-month duration (i.e. 180 days) for 
storage of a put pile from the time the pile is first staged until 
final disposal in the working face of the Landfill Cell 8. If an issue 
arises where greater than 180 days temporary staging of a put pile is 
necessary, the Utah DEQ may issue an extension, if warranted.

[[Page 37320]]

C. Required Put Pile Engineered Controls

    This section describes engineered controls required for put piles, 
in addition to site-wide engineered controls described in the petition 
and proposed approval found in the docket under Docket ID No. EPA-R08-
RCRA-2025-0420.
    All put piles must be temporarily stored in a designated area of 
Landfill Cell 8 until LDR compliance has been confirmed. The put piles 
must then be moved to the working face of Landfill Cell 8.
    The put piles must be encapsulated (liner below and Posi-
Shell[supreg] atop) by the unit-specific engineered barriers discussed 
below to prevent migration of hazardous constituents beyond the put 
pile boundary. These unit-specific barriers are distinct from the 
existing landfill controls for Landfill Cell 8, such as run-on and run-
off controls, that were considered in the overall prevention of 
migration of hazardous constituents.
1. Liners
    A liner of at least 20-mil thickness polyethylene geomembrane must 
be used as a barrier to vertical and lateral migration for the put 
piles. The liner beneath the pile will provide a barrier for vertical 
migration. Because the layout of the put piles is accommodated within 
the standard width of a prefabricated geomembrane roll, the liner must 
be one solid piece without the need for welding of seams. The lack of 
seams lends to additional assurance that hazardous constituents will 
not migrate through a broken seam. The Agency concludes that a liner of 
at least 20-mil thickness, in conjunction with the inspection program 
described in the Compliance Monitoring Program section, is appropriate 
for use in this temporary disposal scenario; however, there must always 
be at least 12 inches of the liner visible on all sides of the put pile 
to prevent potential horizontal migration of the waste from the edge of 
the liner.
    Before placing the put piles in the temporary storage area of 
Landfill Cell 8, Clean Harbors must grade the temporary storage area 
where put piles will be located. The grading must be relatively flat 
but with a slight positive grade to preclude ponding of water on the 
polyethylene liners.
2. Covers
    Clean Harbors must use a Posi-Shell[supreg] cover to act as a rain 
and wind barrier for put piles, to ensure no migration of hazardous 
constituents from the put piles occurs via lateral migration or air 
pathways. Posi-Shell[supreg] is a spray-applied mortar applied as a 
coating to the surface of the put piles, with a minimum cover thickness 
of \3/8\-inch. Because Posi-Shell[supreg] is a mortar, curing is 
necessary to allow it to harden. Curing typically occurs within 12-24 
hours in dry weather, forming a relatively impermeable thin layer of 
durable, hardened mortar. However, if moderate to heavy rainfall occurs 
unexpectedly or is imminent, sustained freezing temperatures are 
expected for more than one day, or the temperature falls below 30 
[deg]F, the Posi-Shell[supreg] will not harden sufficiently. During 
these times of inclement weather, Clean Harbors must temporarily cover 
the put piles with polyethylene sheeting of at least 20-mil thickness, 
anchored with sandbags around its edges, until the adverse weather 
conditions abate, and the Posi-Shell[supreg] coating can be applied. 
Within twenty-four (24) hours of weather conditions amenable to Posi-
Shell[supreg] application, Clean Harbors must apply the coating.
3. Run-On/Run-Off Controls
    Upgradient of the staging area for each put pile, Clean Harbors 
must construct and/or maintain a diversion berm of sufficient height/
width to direct run-on away from each of the put piles. As Landfill 
Cell 8 is filled, if the waste grade changes adjacent to the put pile 
temporary storage area, additional diversion berms must be added, if 
necessary to divert stormwater run-on and run-off to isolate the 
staging area on the working face of Landfill Cell 8. To control run-
off, in addition to the Posi-shell[supreg] coating, Clean Harbors must 
include, at a minimum, ditches around the inside perimeter of Landfill 
Cell 8 embankments and must remove ponded stormwater that accumulates 
on top of the put piles.
4. Compliance Monitoring Plan
    In accordance with 40 CFR 268.6(a)(4), Clean Harbors must maintain 
at the facility, a put pile monitoring plan that includes, at a 
minimum, components 1-16 below, many of which were included by Clean 
Harbors in the petition and the Agency adopts as proposed.
    Deficiencies identified during inspection must be remedied/repaired 
to ensure no migration of hazardous constituents occurs. Deficiencies 
may include cracking, breakdown, or insufficient application of the 
Posi-Shell cover; gaps, tears, or holes in plastic sheeting utilized 
for the management of the unit; presence of stormwater run-on flow and/
or ponded water; visibly exposed waste; and poor overall pile 
condition. Deficiencies must be remedied within one (1) week of 
discovery, and remedies must be recorded in the facility's operating 
record.
    Deficiencies described by this section must be remedied regardless 
of whether Clean Harbors determines that a migration of hazardous 
constituents has occurred or may have occurred if LDR compliance 
verification of the waste in the unit is not yet available. If Clean 
Harbors determines that there has been a migration of hazardous 
constituents from any of the put piles or is unable to remedy any 
deficiency within one (1) week of discovery, Clean Harbors must 
immediately suspend receipt of waste at the affected put pile and 
notify the Region 8 Administrator, in writing, within ten (10) days of 
the determination that a release has occurred or that a deficiency was 
unable to be remedied within one (1) week.
    Clean Harbors must:
    1. Review and track LDR standard ``pass rates'' for put piles. To 
ensure that the waste piles are only being ``temporarily stored,'' as 
described in the February 2023 guidance, if the failure rate of the 
initial verification test for treated put piles exceeds 5% in a 
calendar month, Clean Harbors must conduct a root cause analysis and 
adjust the treatment protocol for the affected category of waste.
    2. Inspect the temporary staging area for put piles prior to 
deploying the 20-mil polyethylene liner. The underlying area must be 
free of large or rigid objects that may damage the liner.
    3. Observe that the liner is not displaced or damaged during 
placement of the waste piles on the liner to confirm the integrity of 
the liner beneath a waste pile. A damaged liner must be replaced with a 
new liner.
    4. Perform daily inspection of covered waste piles to verify 
integrity of the liner, cover, and overall pile condition. Inspectors 
must, at a minimum, check for (1) signs of stormwater run-on flow that 
has or is migrating towards a put pile, or other signs of potential for 
put pile erosion, undermining, or washout of the waste encapsulation 
barriers; (2) damage from strong winds, heavy rain, or other extreme 
weather events (e.g., in particular, causing holes, uplift, or other 
breaches in the Posi-Shell[supreg] cover) within 24 hours of such 
event; (3) visible exposed waste; (4) releases of waste (washout/
undermining, displacement/movement of the pile such as shifting or 
slumping, windblown waste particles, etc.); (5) other indications of 
potential for migration or actual observed migration of hazardous 
constituents from the pile

[[Page 37321]]

(e.g., liquid seeps on the waste pile slopes or emanating from its 
base); and (6) cracks in the Posi-Shell[supreg].
    5. Ensure Appropriate Posi-Shell[supreg] application. Adhering to 
inclement weather application prohibitions as recommended by the 
manufacturer. If a waste pile is unable to be immediately covered with 
a Posi-Shell[supreg] (e.g., moderate to heavy rainfall occurs 
unexpectedly or is imminent), the waste pile must be temporarily 
covered with polyethylene sheeting of at least 20-mil thickness and 
anchored with sandbags around its edges until the adverse weather 
conditions abate and the Posi-Shell[supreg] coating can then be 
applied. Posi-Shell[supreg] should not be applied when temperatures at 
or below 32 [deg]F are expected for more than one day or for any length 
of time when temperatures are below 30 [deg]F.
    6. Verify that 100% coverage of Posi-Shell[supreg] is achieved over 
the entire put pile (no bare or thin spots).
    7. Confirm that the minimum \3/8\-in thickness of Posi-
Shell[supreg] is achieved.
    8. Confirm that the Posi-Shell[supreg] cover is sufficiently set 
(hardened) before a moderate to heavy rainfall event.
    9. Promptly re-apply Posi-Shell[supreg] cover if any deficiencies 
are identified during application, including but not limited to lack of 
coverage, thickness, or hardening.
    10. Check for loss of 100% coverage of Posi-Shell[supreg] or other 
signs of cover degradation (imminent potential for loss of barrier 
effectiveness or thickness).
    Landfill Cell 8-specific remediation requirements:
    11. Remove ponded water on the landfill surface that could affect 
the put piles.
    12. Modify, as needed, run-on controls to continue to divert 
surface water around each put pile staging area.
    13. Maintain or alter, as appropriate, landfill grading to prevent 
put pile run-on.
    14. Isolate the four waste categories/groups of put piles from each 
other to prevent potential commingling.
    15. Maintain landfill equipment.
    16. Submit a duplicate copy of the RCRA annual report required by 
40 CFR 268.6(c)(3). This will include all LDR verification sampling, 
resampling, and retreatment to EPA Region 8 at: Jesse Newland; Land, 
Chemicals and Redevelopment Division; EPA Region 8; 1595 Wynkoop 
Street, Denver, Colorado 80202-1129, Mail Code: 8LCR-RC-P; telephone 
number: (303) 312-6353.

IV. Future Amendments to This NMV

    If Clean Harbors anticipates needing to exceed 250 put piles at any 
one time, it must request approval from EPA Region 8 Administrator 
prior to creating new put piles. Clean Harbors also requested that this 
variance proactively apply to future put piles of identical waste 
characteristics that would be staged in future proposed and permitted 
Subtitle C landfill cells.
    While this Final Approval applies only to those put piles placed 
within existing Landfill Cell 8, upon permit approval of new cells, 
Clean Harbors may submit to EPA Region 8 an addendum to this petition 
to expand this NMV and all of its conditions and requirements, for the 
put piles located within the new landfill cell if:
    1. Clean Harbors is in compliance with the approved NMV;
    2. The new landfill cell uses the same disposal unit engineered 
controls (e.g., landfill cell interior berms for run-on and run-off 
control) as approved in this variance;
    3. The duration of temporary placement remains at six (6) months or 
less and complies with the conditions established herein;
    4. The waste categories remain the same; and
    5. The monitoring program (e.g., groundwater monitoring) is 
expanded to include the new landfill cell.
    Additionally, 40 CFR 268.6(e) acknowledges the potential for post-
approval changes in conditions at the no migration unit(s) and/or the 
environment around the no migration unit(s). For the purpose of this 
NMV, all changes that significantly depart from the conditions 
described in the petition and proposed approval found in Docket ID No. 
EPA-R08-RCRA-2025-0420 must be reported to the Region 8 Administrator 
if the changes have the potential to affect migration of hazardous 
constituents from the put piles:
    1. If Clean Harbors plans to make changes to the unit(s)' design, 
construction, or operation, such a change must be proposed, in writing, 
and include a demonstration to the Region 8 Administrator at least 30 
days prior to making the change. The Region 8 Administrator will 
determine whether the proposed change invalidates the terms of the 
approved variance and will determine the appropriate response. A 
proposed change must first be approved by the Region 8 Administrator 
before taking any action.
    2. If Clean Harbors discovers a site condition that does not occur 
as modeled or predicted in the petition, this change must be reported, 
in writing, to the Region 8 Administrator within 10 days of discovery. 
The Region 8 Administrator will determine whether the reported change 
from expected conditions alters the terms of the approved variance and 
thus requires further action.

V. Public Comment Period

    EPA announced its proposal to approve the Clean Harbors NMV 
petition and provided 30-day public comment period on December 1, 2025. 
The comment period closed on January 30, 2026 (90 FR 61356, December 
31, 2025). EPA received three comments in response to the proposed NMV 
approval. The public comments and EPA's responses are available in the 
docket for this action (EPA-R08-RCRA-2025-0420). Portions of the three 
comments were outside the scope of this action; EPA addresses the 
relevant issues in the Response to Comments document provided in the 
docket.

VI. Conclusion

    The agency concludes that Clean Harbors has demonstrated, to a 
reasonable degree of certainty, that there will be no migration of 
hazardous constituents beyond the unit boundary for treated hazardous 
wastes temporarily stored in put piles within permitted Subtitle C 
hazardous waste Landfill Cell 8 while awaiting verification of 
compliance with the LDR standards. Accordingly, EPA hereby approves the 
NMV for Clean Harbors' Grassy Mountain facility, subject to the terms 
and conditions stated herein and as presented in the petition found in 
the docket.

List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 268

    Environmental protection, Hazardous waste, Variances.

    Dated: June 8, 2026.
Cyrus Western,
Regional Administrator, Region 8.
[FR Doc. 2026-12544 Filed 6-22-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6560-50-P