[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 119 (Tuesday, June 23, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 37336-37341]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12576]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Fish and Wildlife Service

50 CFR Part 92

[Docket No. FWS-R7-MB-2025-1694; FXMB12610700000-267-FF07M01000]
RIN 1018-BI70

Migratory Bird Subsistence Harvest in Alaska

AGENCY: Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: We, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service), are revising 
the migratory bird subsistence harvest regulations in Alaska. 
Subsistence harvest regulations allow for the continuation of customary 
and traditional subsistence uses of migratory birds in Alaska and 
establish when and where the harvesting of certain migratory birds may 
occur within each subsistence region. Subsistence harvest regulations, 
including the changes set forth in this document, were developed 
through a cooperative process involving the Service, the Alaska 
Department of Fish and Game, and Alaska Native representatives.

DATES: This rule takes effect on June 23, 2026.

ADDRESSES: You may inspect the comments received on the March 9, 2026, 
proposed rule at the Federal eRulemaking Portal:  http://www.regulations.gov  in Docket No. FWS-R7-MB-2025-1694.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Wendy Loya, U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, 1011 E. Tudor Road, Mail Stop 201, Anchorage, AK 99503; (907) 
227-2942. Individuals in the United States who are deaf, deafblind, 
hard of hearing, or have a speech disability may dial 711 (TTY, TDD, or 
TeleBraille) to access telecommunications relay services. Individuals 
outside the United States should use the relay services offered within 
their country to make international calls to the point of contact in 
the United States.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Background

    The Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 (MBTA, 16 U.S.C. 703 et seq.) 
was enacted to protect migratory birds and gives the Secretary of the 
Interior (Secretary) the authority to regulate the harvest of certain 
migratory birds. The law further authorizes the Secretary to issue 
regulations to ensure that the indigenous inhabitants of the State of 
Alaska may take certain migratory birds and collect their eggs for 
nutritional and other essential needs during seasons established by the 
Secretary to provide for the preservation and maintenance of these 
migratory birds (16 U.S.C. 712(1)).
    The take of migratory birds for subsistence uses in Alaska occurs 
primarily during the spring and summer, a timeframe not included in the 
fall and winter general migratory game bird hunting regulations for the 
United States. Regulations governing the subsistence harvest of 
migratory birds in Alaska are located in title 50 of the Code

[[Page 37337]]

of Federal Regulations (CFR) in part 92. These regulations allow for 
the continuation of customary and traditional subsistence uses of 
migratory birds and establish when and where the harvesting of certain 
birds in Alaska may occur within each subsistence region.
    The migratory bird subsistence harvest regulations are developed 
cooperatively. The Alaska Migratory Bird Co-Management Council (Council 
or AMBCC) consists of the Service, the Alaska Department of Fish and 
Game (ADFG), and Alaska Native representatives. The Council's primary 
purpose is to develop recommendations pertaining to the subsistence 
harvest of migratory birds.
    This rule incorporates changes to the subsistence harvest 
regulations that were recommended by the Council in 2025 as described 
below.

Comments Received on the Proposed Rule

    Per the collaborative process described above, we published a 
proposed rule on March 9, 2026, to update the regulations for the 
taking of migratory birds for subsistence uses in Alaska during spring 
and summer (91 FR 11266). By the end of the comment period on April 8, 
2026, we received six comments pertaining to the proposed rule. We made 
no changes to the proposed rule as a result of input we received via 
the public comments, however, we added further discussion to this rule 
regarding the regulatory revisions based on public comments we 
received. See Final Regulations, below, for more information.
    Issue: One commenter believed that there should be no legal 
subsistence harvest opportunity for migratory birds in Alaska.
    Response: For millennia, Indigenous peoples of Alaska have 
harvested migratory birds for subsistence purposes during the spring 
and summer months. The U.S. treaties with Canada and Mexico were 
amended for the express purpose of allowing subsistence harvest of 
migratory birds during these months. The MBTA allows for the lawful and 
sustainable harvest of migratory birds and their eggs per regulations.
    Issue: Four commenters expressed support of the process presented 
in the proposed rule that was used to incorporate local input and 
Indigenous Knowledge in determining a meaningful region name and more 
appropriate harvest season dates.
    Response: The Service appreciates the commenters' support for 
involvement of Tribal regional representatives in developing regulatory 
changes.
    Issue: One commenter recommended the Service collect subsistence 
harvest data to measure the effect of the proposed regulatory change.
    Response: Harvest of waterfowl and cranes by rural residents within 
the Upper Copper River/Ahtna Territory region represents less than 0.2 
percent of the statewide harvest (Naves and Schamber 2024) and the 
population of the eight eligible communities in the region represents 
about 1.3 percent of the statewide population in eligible subsistence 
harvest areas ( https://live.laborstats.alaska.gov/landing/pop-cen.html ). In addition, there are no threatened eiders or species of 
conservation concern (e.g., emperor geese) present in this region. 
These factors suggest that any increase in regional subsistence harvest 
due to the proposed change in season dates is unlikely to have any 
measurable effect on harvest or population size of migratory birds in 
Alaska. Past subsistence harvest surveys in Alaska have lacked the 
precision to detect small changes in statewide harvest and would incur 
an unnecessary burden on subsistence harvesters.
    Issue: One commenter recommended implementation of flexible harvest 
closure dates based on annual environmental conditions.
    Response: The use of static closure dates that approximate the 
primary nesting periods for their respective geographic areas may not 
align the timing of nesting activity with closure dates for some 
species in some years. However, static closure dates increase the 
clarity of regulations for subsistence harvesters and law enforcement 
and have been implemented successfully in 10 of the 12 regions, 
including the Upper Copper River/Ahtna Territory region. The co-
management process allows a region to petition the AMBCC to change to a 
flexible closure date process, as two regions have already done, but 
the Upper Copper River/Ahtna Territory has not proposed such changes.
    Issue: One commenter recommended that urban residents be restricted 
from the subsistence harvest of migratory birds and eggs during spring 
and summer.
    Response: Residents of urban areas are generally restricted from 
harvest of migratory birds in spring and summer per regulation (50 CFR 
92.5).
    Issue: One commenter recommended records of all Tribal 
consultations be included in the final rule.
    Response: To date, no requests for formal or informal Tribal 
consultation on the proposed rule have been requested.
    Issue: One commenter recommended that sources of Indigenous 
Knowledge be credited under the discussion in Revisions to Subpart D in 
the final rule.
    Response: The Service appreciates the commenter's suggestion to 
recognize the source of Indigenous Knowledge in the development of 
harvest regulations. The source of Indigenous Knowledge that supports 
the proposed change in harvest season dates was submitted in a proposal 
to the AMBCC in December 2025 (AMBCC Proposal No. 2026-02) and 
originated from members of the Copper River Migratory Bird Co-
Management Council, through the Ahtna Intertribal Resource Commission. 
Oral testimony from the Ahtna Intertribal Resource Commission in 
support of the proposal was presented at the May 9, 2025, AMBCC meeting 
in Anchorage, Alaska.
    Issue: One commenter recommended the Service ensure adaptive 
management strategies are in place to respond to climate-driven shifts 
in nesting chronology.
    Response: The Service adapts its management strategies for the 
spring-summer subsistence harvest of migratory birds and their eggs 
through participation in the AMBCC. The AMBCC meets twice annually and 
provides an opportunity for regional Alaska Native representatives to 
describe observations from the communities they represent. Such 
observations include changes in the abundance and species of birds, 
harvest, climate, bird migration patterns, and nesting activity. From 
these observations and other supporting data, the Council can identify 
where regulatory proposals may be needed to change 30-day closure dates 
to adequately protect birds during the principal nesting period.
    Issue: One commenter recommended the Service implement a 3-year 
evaluation period to measure the effect of the proposed change in 
subsistence harvest season dates on migratory bird species harvested 
during the spring-summer season in this region.
    Response: The Service does not believe a 3-year evaluation period 
is necessary to assess the effect of the proposed change in subsistence 
harvest season dates on migratory bird populations in this region. This 
region has low harvest levels and few hunters, making any increase in 
subsistence harvest due to the proposed changes unlikely to have any 
population level effects (see response above to third issue for 
additional information). Implementation of a 3-year evaluation period 
would incur an unnecessary burden on subsistence hunters and cost

[[Page 37338]]

to the public. The Service evaluates the status of migratory birds 
annually throughout North America using aerial waterfowl population 
surveys (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 2025), including within the 
region described in the proposed action, and together with partners in 
the AMBCC will evaluate all available information and propose 
regulatory changes where warranted.

Final Regulations

    We are making no changes to the regulatory revisions proposed in 
our March 9, 2026, proposed rule (91 FR 11266) as a result of the input 
we received via the public comments.
    The rule sets forth the following revisions to the regulations for 
the taking of certain migratory birds for subsistence uses in Alaska 
during the spring and summer.

Revisions to Subpart A

    In 50 CFR part 92, subpart A (general provisions), we change the 
name of the Upper Copper River region to the Ahtna Territory region in 
Sec.  92.5. The Upper Copper River region is one of 12 geographic 
regions (called regional management areas) in Alaska based on common 
subsistence resource use patterns and the 12 Alaska Native regional 
corporation boundaries established under the Alaska Native Claims 
Settlement Act (ANCSA, 43 U.S.C. 1606). The Upper Copper River region 
has eight eligible communities whose harvest area includes Alaska State 
Game Management Units (GMUs) 11, 12, and 13. The Copper River Migratory 
Bird Co-Management Council submitted a proposal to the AMBCC requesting 
their region be renamed Ahtna Territory to reflect the desires of 
member communities to self-identify with an appropriate regional name. 
The current name inaccurately reflects the region's community 
membership and eligible harvest area, as the community of Cantwell is 
not located in the Copper River drainage and its traditional hunting 
areas are within the watersheds of other major rivers (e.g., the Yukon 
and Susitna). Renaming this region as the Ahtna Territory will help 
clarify Ahtna Tribal communities included in the region and better 
identify those eligible to participate in the spring-summer subsistence 
harvest.
    The AMBCC recommended an amendment to the regulations to change the 
name of the Upper Copper River region to the Ahtna Territory region on 
April 9, 2025. This regulatory amendment was supported by the Pacific 
Flyway Council on September 12, 2025, and the SRC on December 16, 2025, 
and intended for implementation beginning with the 2026 subsistence 
season.

Revision to Subpart B

    In 50 CFR part 92, subpart B (program structure), we change the 
name of the Upper Copper River region to the Ahtna Territory region in 
Sec.  92.11 as described above for subpart A.

Revisions to Subpart D

    In 50 CFR part 92, subpart D (annual regulations governing 
subsistence harvest), we make several changes for the Upper Copper 
River region: changing the region's name, clarifying language regarding 
the harvest area, and modifying the season dates.
    First, we change the name of the Upper Copper River region to the 
Ahtna Territory region in Sec.  92.31(i) as described above for subpart 
A.
    Second, we clarify and simplify the language in Sec.  92.31(i) 
regarding which GMUs are included in the harvest area for the Upper 
Copper River region. Currently, Sec.  92.31(i) states that the harvest 
area for the eight eligible communities--Gulkana, Chitina, Tazlina, 
Copper Center, Gakona, Mentasta Lake, Chistochina, and Cantwell--
includes GMUs 11 and 13. However, Sec.  92.31(i)(3) later adds GMU 12 
as a harvest area for the Copper River Basin communities listed in 
Sec.  92.31(i). This creates confusion, as one of the communities 
(Cantwell) is not located in the Copper River Basin. The current 
language implies that GMUs 11, 12, and 13 are open for the seven Copper 
River Basin communities, while Cantwell's harvest area is limited to 
GMUs 11 and 13. However, Cantwell is located north of the Alaska Range, 
which qualifies it as an ``included area'' under Sec.  92.5(a). As 
such, its residents are eligible to harvest birds during the spring-
summer season in areas north of the Alaska Range, like GMU 12. To 
clarify the regulations, we add GMU 12 to the list of GMUs in Sec.  
92.31(i) for all eight communities. We also remove Sec.  92.31(i)(3), 
as it would become redundant following this change and the season date 
revisions described below.
    Third, we modify the season dates within the Upper Copper River 
region listed in Sec.  92.31(i)(1) and (i)(2). This change will 
simplify the regulations and better align season dates with bird 
presence in the region. The Upper Copper River region's harvest area 
includes GMUs 11, 12, and 13 as described above, but currently the 
hunting and egg gathering seasons for GMUs 11 and 13 are different from 
those in GMU 12. The Copper River Migratory Bird Co-Management Council 
proposed changing the season dates for GMUs 11 and 13 (currently: April 
15-May 26 and June 27-August 31; closure: May 27-June 26) to match 
those in GMU 12 (season: April 2-June 14 and July 16-August 31; egg 
gathering May 1-June 14 only; closure: June 15-July 15). The change 
will better align the season dates in GMUs 11 and 13 with the 
availability of birds in the region and improve alignment of the 30-day 
nesting closure with the principal nesting period. The change would 
also simplify regulations for the region by establishing consistent 
season dates in all three GMUs (11, 12, and 13) and, along with the 
clarification described above, allows the removal of Sec.  92.31(i)(3).
    Harvest of waterfowl and cranes by rural residents within the Upper 
Copper River/Ahtna Territory region represents less than 0.2 percent of 
the statewide harvest (Naves and Schamber 2024) and the population of 
the eight eligible communities in the region represents about 1.3 
percent of the statewide population in eligible subsistence harvest 
areas ( https://live.laborstats.alaska.gov/landing/pop-cen.html ). In 
addition, there are no threatened eiders or species of conservation 
concern (e.g., emperor geese) present in this region. These factors 
suggest that any increase in harvest due to these changes is unlikely 
to have any population level effects. The AMBCC relied on Indigenous 
Knowledge from the region to substantiate the necessity of adjusting 
season dates.
    On April 9, 2025, the AMBCC recommended an amendment to the 
regulations to change the season dates for GMUs 11 and 13 in the Upper 
Copper River region to April 2-June 14 and July 16-August 31; egg 
gathering May 1-June 14 only; closure: June 15-July 15 to match those 
in GMU 12. The word ``only'' is used after the egg gathering season 
dates to be consistent with the current regulations, e.g., at Sec.  
92.31(h) for the Interior region. This regulatory amendment was 
supported by the Pacific Flyway Council on September 12, 2025, and the 
SRC on December 16, 2025, and intended for implementation beginning 
with the 2026 subsistence season.

Compliance With the MBTA and the Endangered Species Act

    The Service has dual objectives and responsibilities for 
authorizing a subsistence harvest while protecting migratory birds and 
threatened species. Although these objectives are challenging, they are 
not irreconcilable, provided that: (1) regulations continue to protect 
threatened species, (2) measures to address documented threats are 
implemented, and (3) the

[[Page 37339]]

subsistence community and other conservation partners commit to working 
together.
    Mortality, sickness, and poisoning from lead exposure have been 
documented in many waterfowl species, including threatened spectacled 
eiders (Somateria fischeri) and the Alaska-breeding population of 
Steller's eiders (Polysticta stelleri). While lead shot has been banned 
nationally for waterfowl hunting since 1991, Service staff have 
documented the availability of lead shot in waterfowl ammunition for 
sale in communities on the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta and North Slope. The 
Service continues to work with partners to increase education, 
outreach, and enforcement efforts to ensure that subsistence waterfowl 
hunting is conducted using nontoxic shot.

Conservation Under the MBTA

    Based on long-term monitoring of harvest and population size of the 
migratory bird species taken for subsistence, we find that this final 
rule will provide for the preservation and maintenance of migratory 
birds as required by the MBTA. Communication and coordination with the 
AMBCC and the Pacific Flyway Council have aided in the establishment of 
hunting regulations to ensure the long-term viability of the migratory 
birds exposed to harvest.

Endangered Species Act Consideration

    Spectacled eiders and the Alaska-breeding population of Steller's 
eiders are listed as threatened species under the Endangered Species 
Act of 1973, as amended (ESA, 16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.). Their migration 
and breeding distribution overlap with areas where the spring and 
summer subsistence migratory bird harvest is open in Alaska. However, 
neither eider species is present in the Upper Copper River region where 
this final rule applies. In addition, both species are closed to 
subsistence harvest and under Sec. Sec.  92.21 and 92.32 the Service 
may implement emergency closures, if necessary, to protect Steller's 
eiders or any other endangered or threatened species or migratory bird 
population.
    Section 7 of the ESA requires the Secretary to review other 
programs administered by the Department of the Interior and utilize 
such programs in furtherance of the purposes of the ESA. The Secretary 
is further required to ensure that any action authorized, funded, or 
carried out by the Department of the Interior is not likely to 
jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered species or 
threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse modification 
of critical habitat.
    The Service's Alaska Region Migratory Bird Management Program 
conducted an intra-agency consultation with the Service's Northern 
Alaska Fish and Wildlife Field Office on the proposed rule (91 FR 
11266; March 9, 2026). Given the absence of listed eiders in the action 
area, a no effect determination was made. Therefore, the Service will 
not need to issue a letter of concurrence or biological opinion, and we 
have determined that this rule complies with the ESA.

Immediate Effective Date

    This rule takes effect on the date set forth above in DATES. To 
respect the subsistence hunt of many rural Alaskans, either for their 
cultural or religious exercise, for providing sustenance, or for 
acquiring materials for cultural use (e.g., handicrafts), the 
Department of the Interior finds that it is in the public interest to 
make this rule effective as soon as possible. Delaying the effective 
date for 30 days would have detrimental effects on Alaskans seeking to 
conduct subsistence harvest of migratory birds. Within the terms of 5 
U.S.C. 553(d)(1) of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), the 
regulations in 50 CFR part 92 recognize a statutory exemption provided 
to rural Alaskans for the subsistence harvest of migratory birds. For 
these reasons, under the authority of the APA and the MBTA, this rule 
takes effect immediately upon publication in the Federal Register.

Required Determinations

Regulatory Planning and Review (Executive Orders (E.O.s) 12866 and 
13563)

    E.O. 12866 provides that the Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (OIRA) in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) will review 
all significant rules. OIRA has determined that this rule is not 
significant.
    E.O. 13563 reaffirms the principles of E.O. 12866 while calling for 
improvements in the Nation's regulatory system to promote 
predictability, to reduce uncertainty, and to use the best, most 
innovative, and least burdensome tools for achieving regulatory ends. 
E.O. 13563 directs agencies to consider regulatory approaches that 
reduce burdens and maintain flexibility and freedom of choice for the 
public where these approaches are relevant, feasible, and consistent 
with regulatory objectives. E.O. 13563 emphasizes further that 
regulations must be based on the best available science and that the 
rulemaking process must allow for public participation and an open 
exchange of ideas. We have developed these revisions to the CFR in a 
manner consistent with these requirements.

Regulatory Flexibility Act

    The Department of the Interior certifies that this rule will not 
have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small 
entities as defined under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 
et seq.). A regulatory flexibility analysis is not required.
    Accordingly, a small entity compliance guide is not required. The 
regulations at 50 CFR part 92 legalize a preexisting subsistence 
activity. The commodities that are regulated under these regulations 
are migratory birds, and the resources harvested are consumed. This 
final rule makes only modest changes to the current regulations.

Congressional Review Act

    This final rule is not a major rule under 5 U.S.C. 804(2), the 
Congressional Review Act. This final rule:
    (a) Would not have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million 
or more. The regulations at 50 CFR part 92 legalize the subsistence 
harvest of migratory birds and, as such, do not involve commodities 
traded in the marketplace. This final rule would not result in a 
substantial increase in subsistence harvest or a significant change in 
harvesting patterns.
    (b) Would not cause a major increase in costs or prices for 
consumers; individual industries; Federal, State, or local government 
agencies; or geographic regions. This final rule does not deal with 
traded commodities and, therefore, would not have an impact on prices 
for consumers.
    (c) Would not have significant adverse effects on competition, 
employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or the ability of 
U.S.-based enterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprises. This 
final rule deals with the harvesting of wildlife for personal 
consumption. It would not regulate the marketplace in any way to 
generate substantial effects on the economy or the ability of 
businesses to compete.

Unfunded Mandates Reform Act

    We have determined and certified under the Unfunded Mandates Reform 
Act (2 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.) that this final rule would not impose a 
cost of $100 million or more in any given year on local, State, or 
Tribal governments or private entities. The final rule would not have a 
significant or unique effect on local, State, or Tribal governments or 
the private sector. A statement

[[Page 37340]]

containing the information required by the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
is not required. Participation on regional management bodies and the 
Council requires travel expenses for some Alaska Native organizations 
and local governments. In addition, they assume some expenses related 
to coordinating involvement of village councils in the regulatory 
process. Total coordination and travel expenses for all Alaska Native 
organizations are estimated to be less than $300,000 per year. When 
funding permits, the Service makes annual grant agreements available to 
the partner organizations and the ADFG to help offset their expenses. 
However, this final rule would not revise any regulations pertaining to 
participation in the regulatory process.

Takings (E.O. 12630)

    Under the criteria in E.O. 12630, this final rule would not have 
significant takings implications. The changes to the regulations at 50 
CFR part 92 are not specific to particular landownership but instead 
apply to the harvesting of migratory bird resources in portions of 
Alaska. A takings implication assessment is not required.

Federalism (E.O. 13132)

    In accordance with E.O. 13132 (Federalism), this final rule does 
not have significant federalism implications to warrant the preparation 
of a federalism summary impact statement. The Service worked with the 
State of Alaska to develop these regulations. Therefore, a federalism 
summary impact statement is not required.

Civil Justice Reform (E.O. 12988)

    The Department, in promulgating this final rule, has determined 
that it would not unduly burden the judicial system and that it meets 
the requirements of sections 3(a) and 3(b)(2) of E.O. 12988.

Government-to-Government Relations With Native American Tribal 
Governments

    In accordance with E.O. 13175 (``Consultation and Coordination with 
Indian Tribal Governments''), and the Department of the Interior's 
manual chapters at 512 DM 2, 512 DM 4, and 512 DM 6, we readily 
acknowledge our responsibility to communicate meaningfully with 
federally recognized Tribes and Alaska Native Corporations on a 
government-to-government basis. We sent letters via electronic mail to 
all 229 federally recognized Indian Tribes in Alaska. Consistent with 
512 DM 5 and 512 DM 7, we also sent letters to approximately 200 Alaska 
Native Corporations and other Tribal entities in Alaska soliciting 
their input as to whether or not they would like the Service to consult 
with them on the proposed changes to the migratory bird subsistence 
harvest regulations.
    We implemented the amended treaty with Canada with a focus on local 
involvement. The treaty calls for the creation of management bodies to 
ensure an effective and meaningful role for Alaska's indigenous 
inhabitants in the conservation of migratory birds. According to the 
Letter of Submittal, management bodies are to include Alaska Native, 
Federal, and State of Alaska representatives as equals. They develop 
recommendations for, among other things: seasons and bag limits, 
methods and means of take, law enforcement policies, population and 
harvest monitoring, educational programs, research and use of 
traditional knowledge, and habitat protection. The management bodies 
involve village councils to the maximum extent possible in all aspects 
of management. To ensure maximum input at the village level, we 
required each of the 11 participating regions to create regional 
management bodies consisting of at least one representative from the 
participating villages. The regional management bodies meet up to twice 
annually to review and/or submit proposals to the statewide body.

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA)

    This final rule does not contain any new collection of information 
that requires approval by the OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 
1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). An agency may not conduct or sponsor, 
and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information 
unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. OMB has 
previously approved the information collection requirements associated 
with subsistence harvest reporting and assigned the following OMB 
control numbers:
      Alaska Migratory Bird Subsistence Harvest Household 
Survey, OMB Control Number 1018-0124 (expires July 31, 2027), and
      Regulations for the Taking of Migratory Birds for 
Subsistence Uses in Alaska, 50 CFR part 92, OMB Control Number 1018-
0178 (expires July 31, 2027).

National Environmental Policy Act Consideration (42 U.S.C. 4321 et 
seq.)

    The regulations at 50 CFR part 92 and options are considered in the 
Finding of No Significant Impact, ``Migratory Bird Subsistence Harvest 
in Alaska; Harvest Regulations for Migratory Birds in Alaska During the 
2026 Spring/Summer Season.'' Copies are available online at:  https://www.fws.gov/media/usfws-finding-no-significant-impact-2026 .

Energy Supply, Distribution, or Use (E.O. 13211)

    E.O. 13211 requires agencies to prepare statements of energy 
effects when undertaking certain actions. This final rule is not a 
significant regulatory action under this E.O.; it allows only for 
traditional subsistence harvest and improves conservation of migratory 
birds by allowing effective regulation of this harvest. This final rule 
would not have any effect on energy supplies, distribution, or use. 
Therefore, this action is not a significant energy action under 
Executive Order 13211, and a statement of energy effects is not 
required.

References Cited

Naves, Liliana C. and Jason L. Schamber. 2024. Harvest of waterfowl 
and Sandhill Crane in rural Alaska: Geographic and seasonal 
patterns. PLoS ONE 19(7): e0307135.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2025. Waterfowl population status, 
2025. U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC USA.

List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 92

    Hunting, Treaties, Wildlife.

Regulation Promulgation

    For the reasons set out in the preamble, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service amends 50 CFR part 92 as set forth below:

PART 92--MIGRATORY BIRD SUBSISTENCE HARVEST IN ALASKA

0
1. The authority citation for part 92 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  16 U.S.C. 703-712.

Sec.  92.5  [Amended]

0
2. In Sec.  92.5 amend paragraphs (a)(2)(i) and (d)(2) by removing the 
words ``Upper Copper River Region'' and adding in their place the words 
``Ahtna Territory Region''.

Sec.  92.11  [Amended]

0
3. In Sec.  92.11 amend paragraph (a)(11) by removing the words ``Upper 
Copper River'' and adding in their place the words ``Ahtna Territory''.

0
4. Amend Sec.  92.31 by revising paragraph (i) to read as follows:

Sec.  92.31  Region-specific regulations.

* * * * *
    (i) Ahtna Territory region (Harvest Area: Game Management Units 11, 
12, and 13) (Eligible communities: Gulkana, Chitina, Tazlina, Copper 
Center,

[[Page 37341]]

Gakona, Mentasta Lake, Chistochina and Cantwell).
    (1) Season: April 2-June 14 and July 16-August 31; egg gathering 
May 1-June 14 only.
    (2) Closure: June 15-July 15.
* * * * *

Kevin Lilly,
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks, 
Exercising the Delegated Authority of the Assistant Secretary for Fish 
and Wildlife and Parks.
[FR Doc. 2026-12576 Filed 6-22-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4333-15-P