[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 119 (Tuesday, June 23, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 37341-37348]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12566]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

50 CFR Part 660

[Docket No. 260615-0144]
RIN 0648-BN95

Magnuson-Stevens Act Provisions; Fisheries off West Coast States; 
Pacific Coast Groundfish Fishery; Cordell Bank Groundfish Conservation 
Area Revisions

AGENCY: National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Commerce.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: NMFS is issuing final regulations to remove the Cordell Bank 
Groundfish Conservation Area off central California for all groundfish 
fisheries and implement a new Groundfish Exclusion Area for all 
groundfish fisheries to protect sensitive habitat. The purpose of this 
action is to simplify regulatory complexity associated with overlapping 
fishery closures in the Cordell Bank area, and to increase fishing 
opportunities while still protecting the Cordell Bank ecosystem.

DATES: Effective June 23, 2026.

ADDRESSES: Information relevant to this action, including the 
integrated analysis that addresses the National Environmental Policy 
Act (NEPA), Presidential Executive Order 12866, the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act, and the statutory requirements of the Magnuson-Stevens 
Fishery Conservation and Management Act (Magnuson-Stevens Act or MSA) 
(collectively referred to as ``the Analysis''), may be obtained from 
the NMFS West Coast Region Groundfish website at:  https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/action/cordell-bank-area-revisions .

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Lynn Massey, phone: 562-900-2060, or 
email:   [email&#160;protected]  .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The Pacific Coast groundfish fishery in the 
U.S. exclusive economic zone (EEZ) seaward of Washington, Oregon, and 
California is managed under the Pacific Coast Groundfish Fishery 
Management Plan (hereafter, Groundfish FMP). The Pacific Fishery 
Management Council (Council) developed the Groundfish FMP pursuant to 
the Magnuson-Stevens Act, 16 U.S.C. 1801 et seq. The Secretary of 
Commerce approved the Groundfish FMP and implemented the provisions of 
the plan at 50 CFR part 660, subparts C through G. Species managed 
under the Groundfish FMP include roundfish, flatfish, rockfish, sharks, 
and skates.
    This final rule (also referred to as the ``action'') includes 
regulations that remove the Cordell Bank Groundfish Conservation Area 
(GCA) off central California for all groundfish fisheries and implement 
a new Groundfish Exclusion Area (GEA) for all groundfish fisheries to 
protect sensitive habitat. GEAs are authorized as an area closure type 
under section 6.8.10 of the Groundfish FMP; therefore no further 
changes to the Groundfish FMP are necessary to designate a new GEA.
    For information on the development of this action, refer to the 
``Background'' section of the proposed rule (91 FR 4485; February 2, 
2026).

Removal of the Cordell Bank GCA

    This final rule removes the Cordell Bank GCA closure from the 
Federal regulations at Sec.  660.70, as well as the associated 
groundfish prohibitions for the trawl, limited entry fixed gear, open 
access, and recreational fishery sectors specified at Sec. Sec.  
660.130, 660.230, 660.330, and 660.360, respectively. Although the 
former GCA was 64 square miles (sq mi) (165.8 square kilometers (sq 
km)), only 40.1 sq mi (104 sq km) is being opened, including 10.2 sq mi 
(26.4 sq km) to almost all trawl gear and the full 40.1 sq mi (104 sq 
km) to non-trawl gear. The former GCA overlapped with two other 
closures: (1) the Cordell Bank Biogenic Essential Fish Habitat 
Conservation Area (EFHCA), which prohibits fishing with bottom trawl 
gear (except for demersal seine) by all fisheries (hereafter referred 
to as the ``bottom trawl EFHCA''); and (2) the Cordell Bank (50-fm 
isobath) EFHCA, which prohibits fishing with bottom contact gear by all 
fisheries (hereafter referred to as the ``bottom contact EFHCA''). The 
former GCA bordered a third closure at the 100 fathom (fm) line--the 
Non-Trawl Rockfish Conservation Area (Non-Trawl RCA), which prohibits 
commercial groundfish fishing with most types of non-trawl gear. These 
closures can be viewed on figure 1 of the Analysis (see ADDRESSES). 
These three closures and their associated prohibitions remain in place, 
and a GEA now overlays the exact geographic footprint of the bottom 
contact EFHCA (see next section).
    The coordinates for the former Cordell Bank GCA include coordinates 
commonly referred to as the ``100-fm ring.'' These coordinates are 
distinct from the 100 fm (183 meter (m)) depth contour line defined at 
Sec.  660.73. Per the trawl management measure regulations at Sec.  
660.130(c)(1)(ii), trawling with large footrope gear is prohibited in 
the area south of 46[deg]16' North latitude (N lat.) and shoreward of 
100 fm (183 m). Removing the Cordell Bank GCA coordinates from Federal 
regulations entirely would default to allow trawling with large 
footrope gear in the 10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq km) opened to trawl gear. In 
order to maintain this prohibition, the coordinates for the 100 fm ring 
have been transferred to Sec.  660.73, which is where the coordinates 
for the coastwide 100 fm (183 m) line and other lines around islands 
and banks are defined.

Creation of the Cordell Bank GEA

    GEAs were first created by and used via Amendment 32 (88 FR 83830, 
December 1, 2023), which implemented eight GEAs in the Southern 
California Bight to protect sensitive coral ecosystems from groundfish 
fishing impacts when the Cowcod Conservation Areas were removed for 
non-trawl commercial and recreational groundfish fisheries. The 
Groundfish FMP authorizes the creation of additional GEAs via 
rulemaking (see section 6.8.10). GEAs are a different type of closure 
from GCAs in that their primary purpose is not to protect groundfish 
species, but to protect habitat. GEAs are different from EFHCAs in that 
GEAs do not necessarily protect groundfish-specific essential fish 
habitat (EFH). Rather, a GEA may be established to protect other types 
of oceanic and seafloor habitats.
    As described in the prior section, there are currently a number of 
overlapping or bordering fishery closures in the Cordell Bank area, 
including the bottom contact and bottom trawl EFHCAs, and the Non-Trawl 
RCA. Each closure has different regulations that prohibit different 
fisheries from operating and different gear types from being used (see 
table 1 of the Analysis), consequently creating confusion among 
fishermen and challenges for enforcement officers. The

[[Page 37342]]

purpose of this action is to reduce regulatory complexity and increase 
fishing opportunities, while protecting the Cordell Bank ecosystem. 
Amendment 19 to the Groundfish FMP designated the Cordell Bank as a 
habitat area of particular concern (HAPC) in 2006, because it contains 
a substantive amount of rocky reef habitat. The Cordell Bank GCA was 
initially implemented in 2004, to reduce catch of several overfished 
groundfish stocks, which are all now rebuilt. Therefore, although there 
is no longer a need for the Cordell Bank GCA to protect overfished 
groundfish species, there remains a need to protect sensitive habitat 
in the area (see next section).
    This final rule establishes the Cordell Bank GEA at Sec.  660.70. 
All groundfish fishing is prohibited within the Cordell Bank GEA. 
Groundfish vessels are allowed to continuously transit through the 
Cordell Bank GEA as long as all groundfish gear is stowed. The Cordell 
Bank GEA is 26.4 sq mi (68.4 sq km), of which 23.9 sq mi (61.9 sq km) 
is inside the former Cordell Bank GCA and the remaining 2.5 sq mi (6.5 
sq km) is outside of the former GCA. The 2.5 sq mi (6.5 sq km) that is 
outside of the former GCA overlaps with the bottom contact EFHCA and 
Non-Trawl RCA, meaning groundfish fishing with non-bottom contact gear 
(e.g., troll gear) used to be allowed in this area. The new GEA now 
prohibits all groundfish fishing, thereby taking away the ability to 
use non-bottom contact gear in this 2.5 sq mi (6.5 sq km). With the 
addition of the GEA, approximately 37 percent of the former Cordell 
Bank GCA footprint remains closed to all groundfish fishing, and most 
of the remaining area still has restrictions in place from the bottom 
contact and bottom trawl EFHCAs. Only 10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq km) or 16 
percent of the former GCA is now open to trawl gear, as there are no 
other overlapping closures in this area. Overall, this final action 
opens a net area of 40.1 sq mi (103.9 sq km). Of this area, 10.2 sq mi 
(26.4 sq km) is open to trawl gear and the full 40.1 sq mi (103.9 sq 
km) is open to non-trawl commercial and recreational gear. The Cordell 
Bank GEA coordinates are the same as the coordinates for the existing 
bottom contact EFHCA (listed at Sec.  660.79(r)), which is expected to 
substantively reduce regulatory complexity and enforcement challenges 
in the area.
    This final rule also revises the regulations at Sec.  660.10 to 
remove the definition of GEA from the list of defined GCAs and 
categorize it as its own type of conservation area. This change better 
reflects the regulatory purpose of GEAs, which is to protect sensitive 
habitats from groundfish fishing as opposed to overfished groundfish 
species from groundfish fishing. The definition of ``Continuous 
transiting or transiting through'' has been accordingly revised to no 
longer specify that continuous transit is allowed in a GCA or EFCHA, 
but rather, all defined conservations areas, which includes GCAs, 
EFHCAs, and GEAs.

Summary of Habitat Impacts

    Known for its extensive rocky reef habitat, the Cordell Bank area 
is designated as groundfish EFH and a HAPC via Amendment 19 to the 
Pacific Coast Groundfish FMP (71 FR 27408, May 11, 2006). It is also 
located within the Cordell Bank National Marine Sanctuary (NMS). The 
Analysis for this action (see ADDRESSES) discloses potential impacts to 
habitat that may result from the opening of the Cordell Bank GCA. 
Specifically, the Analysis includes maps of varying benthic substrates 
(e.g., sandy bottom vs. hard substrate) as well as corals, sponges, and 
sea pens that occur in the areas opened to groundfish trawl and non-
trawl gear types. The Analysis also discusses potential shifts in 
fishery effort by each relevant fishery sector.

Trawl Gear Impacts

    Under this action, approximately 10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq km) of new 
area will be exposed to trawl gear. As described in the Analysis, 
available data show that approximately 3.3 percent (0.54 sq mi or 1.4 
sq km) of that area is rocky reef habitat, with limited coral, sponge, 
and sea pen observations. The remaining area is primarily made up of 
sand substrate with some unconsolidated mineral substrate. The Analysis 
also explains that significant fishing effort with trawl gear is not 
anticipated in the newly opened area, as the area is only 10.2 sq mi 
(26.4 sq km), and there has been limited to no trawl effort in the 
vicinity of the Cordell Bank GCA since 2018. Bottom trawl vessels 
typically avoid high relief rocky habitat to avoid gear damage; 
therefore, even if trawl vessels came to the newly opened area, they 
would likely fish over the areas with a flatter bottom. Additionally, 
trawl regulations at Sec.  660.130(c)(1)(ii) prohibit the use of large 
footrope gear in the area south of 46[deg]16' N lat. and shoreward of 
the 100-fm (183-m) depth contour; therefore, only small footrope gear 
(generally considered to be less damaging than large footrope gear) 
would be permitted in the 10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq km) area opened. As the 
name implies, small footrope gear--in contrast to large footrope gear--
has smaller diameter footrope, including rollers, bobbins, and other 
material, which is designed for lower relief seafloor types and may 
reduce seafloor impact and bycatch. Overall, the Analysis concludes 
that a minimal amount of rocky reef habitat will be exposed to trawl 
gear, and minimal impact from fishing is expected to occur if trawl 
effort shifts into that area. For a more detailed analysis on potential 
habitat impacts from trawl gear, see section 3.1.2 the Analysis.

Non-Trawl Gear Impacts

    Under the action, approximately 40.1 sq mi (103.9 sq km) of new 
area will be exposed to non-trawl gear (e.g., pots, bottom longline, 
hook-and-line), which is generally considered to be less impactful than 
trawl gear (see appendix C to the Pacific Coast Groundfish FMP). As 
described in the Analysis, available data shows that approximately 8.9 
percent (3.6 sq mi or 9.3 sq km) of the 40.1 sq mi (103.9 sq km) newly 
opened area is rocky substrate with an additional 43.2 percent (17.3 sq 
mi or 44.8 sq km) categorized as unconsolidated mineral substrate. The 
remaining half of the newly opened area is categorized as sand. 
Additionally, there are limited coral, sponge, and sea pen observations 
in the area.
    The Analysis also predicts some effort shift into the 40.1 sq mi 
(103.9 sq km) newly opened area from the non-trawl catch share sector 
fisheries, as effort data since 2021 indicates those vessels have been 
fishing in the vicinity of the Cordell Bank GCA. However, these vessels 
would likely use hook-and-line gear, which is generally considered to 
be less impactful on benthic habitat than non-trawl gear types that are 
actively fished on the bottom (e.g., pot or longline). In their 
November 2024 statement (see Agenda Item I.5.a, Supplemental GAP Report 
1 at  https://pcouncil.org ), the Council's Groundfish Advisory Subpanel 
discussed that limited pot gear activity is likely to occur in the area 
due to the high relief habitat features and the fact that the area is 
too shallow for sablefish (the primary target species for pot gear). 
Hook-and-line gear for midwater stocks will likely be the targeted 
fishery occurring in the action area.
    Effort shift from the recreational sector is also anticipated, as 
the Cordell Bank area has historically been a recreational fishing 
ground, and public comments from the November 2024 Council meeting (see 
 https://pcouncil.org ) and on the proposed rule indicate interest in 
adding the Cordell Bank area to a rotation of recreational fishing 
locations to spread out effort on other nearby fishing locations. 
Overall,

[[Page 37343]]

the Analysis anticipates some, but not significant, potential impact in 
the newly opened area from non-trawl gear due to anticipated effort 
shift from the commercial and recreational non-trawl sectors. For a 
more detailed analysis on potential habitat impacts from non-trawl 
gear, see section 3.1.2 the Analysis.
    In addition to opening the 40.1 sq mi (103.9 sq km) of area 
discussed above, NMFS is closing approximately 2.5 sq mi (6.5 sq km) in 
the Cordell Bank area that is currently open to non-trawl non-bottom 
contact gear. This 2.5 sq mi (6.5 sq km) area is currently within the 
bottom contact EFHCA, and therefore, non-bottom contact gears are 
permitted. However, the proposed GEA would close this small 2.5 sq mi 
(6.5 sq km) area to all groundfish fishing.

Essential Fish Habitat

    The Magnuson-Stevens Act and its implementing regulations require 
that FMPs describe and identify EFH and minimize to the extent 
practicable adverse effects on EFH caused by fishing. As such, EFH 
along the U.S. West Coast is described in appendices B and C to the 
Pacific Coast Groundfish FMP and includes the Cordell Bank area. The 
Pacific Coast Groundfish FMP authorizes the use of EFHCAs to protect 
groundfish EFH from specific types of fishing activity. As a result of 
the Council's 2006 EFH review process, a bottom trawl EFHCA and a 
bottom contact EFHCA were implemented in the Cordell Bank area via 
Amendment 19 to the Pacific Coast Groundfish FMP (71 FR 27408, May 11, 
2006). The coordinates for these EFHCAs are listed at Sec.  660.79(q) 
and (r), respectively. As a result of the 2014-2020 EFH process, which 
included review of the Cordell Bank area, the bottom trawl EFHCA was 
later expanded via Amendment 28 (84 FR 63966, November 19, 2019). The 
bottom contact EFHCA was not changed at that time because there was not 
new, definitive information on the benthic habitat effects of non-trawl 
bottom contact gear that compelled revisions. During the development of 
this action, the Council and its Habitat Committee reviewed new 
information on the potential impact to EFH in the Cordell Bank area 
from opening the newly opened areas to both trawl and non-trawl 
fishing. This evaluation is documented in the Analysis (see section 
3.1.2). Overall, the Analysis concludes that there will not be new 
significant impacts to EFH from this action that would require 
additional mitigative measures.

Conclusion

    As described in the Analysis, significant habitat impact from this 
action (including to designated EFH) is not anticipated. Although there 
is some expected effort shift from the commercial and recreational non-
trawl sectors, the primary gear type used would be hook-and-line, as 
fishermen tend to avoid high relief rocky habitat with bottom gear to 
avoid gear damage. Additionally, the newly opened area is too shallow 
for sablefish, which is the primary target for non-trawl bottom gear 
types. The vast majority of coral, sponge, and sea pen observations 
occur within the new GEA and, therefore, will remain protected from 
groundfish fishing impacts.

Public Comments

    The 30-day public comment period on the proposed rule (91 FR 4485) 
occurred from February 2, 2026, through March 4, 2026. NMFS received 80 
comments supporting the proposed rule, 47 comments opposing the 
proposed rule, and five neutral comments that either indicated a mix of 
support and opposition, or provided general commentary with no clear 
stance on the proposed rule. No changes were made to the proposed rule 
in response to public comments.
    The majority of the supportive comments were from industry 
stakeholders, including fishing association representatives and 
individual fishermen. These comments generally expressed enthusiasm for 
gaining back access to historical fishing grounds and the positive 
socio-economic effects that are anticipated to result for California 
coastal communities. Several of the comments also expressed support for 
the ability to use the newly opened area as a rotational fishing 
location for recreational fisheries, which is expected to take partial 
pressure off other nearby recreational fishing locations, including 
Rittenburg Bank.
    NMFS received 47 comments opposing the proposed rule. The majority 
of these comments expressed concern over potential adverse 
environmental impacts from opening the 10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq. km) portion 
of the former GCA to bottom trawl gear. Four of the comments, which 
were all from environmental nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 
included this issue, as well as other concerns. NMFS responds to these 
four comments below. NMFS' response to these four comments also 
addresses the general concerns about bottom trawl gear expressed in the 
other comments.
    The environmental NGOs, which include Oceana, Turtle Island 
Restoration Network (TIRN), Fish On, and Earth Island Institute 
submitted letters that, in summary, claim the proposed rule is 
inconsistent with the mandates of the MSA in regard to EFH protection 
and with NMFS' obligations related to National Marine Sanctuary 
protections. Oceana and TIRN brought forward six primary claims, which 
are responded to in Comments 1 through 6 below. The responses to 
Comments 1 through 5 address the claims in the Fish On letter. The 
response to Comment 5 addresses the claim made in the Earth Island 
Institute letter.
    Comment 1: Oceana, TIRN, and Fish On commented that the proposed 
rule should have been evaluated alongside the Council's routine 
groundfish EFH review process, and that proceeding with opening 
portions of the Cordell Bank area to fishing before this process 
undermines EFH protections. Additionally, Oceana comments that 
evaluating this action outside of a formal EFH review process precludes 
a coherent, science-based evaluation of cumulative and long-term 
impacts.
    Response 1: The MSA and its implementing regulations require that 
FMPs describe and identify EFH and minimize, to the extent practicable, 
adverse effects on EFH caused by fishing (16 U.S.C. 1853(a)(7); 50 CFR 
600.815(a)(2)(i)-(ii)). There is no requirement in the MSA or its 
implementing regulations to conduct an updated EFH review prior to 
implementing a fishery action. However, because amendments to the FMP 
or its implementing regulations must ensure that the FMP continues to 
minimize, to the extent practicable, adverse effects on EFH caused by 
fishing (50 CFR 600.815(a)(2)(ii)), it is appropriate to identify and 
evaluate new information relevant to EFH prior to implementing a 
fishery action. The development of this action included a thorough 
review of the best scientific information available (BSIA) on habitat 
and benthic substrate in the action area, including new information 
available since the last Pacific Coast groundfish review, which 
occurred from 2014-2020. The Council's Habitat Committee vetted that 
scientific information, alongside information on fishing gear impacts 
to benthic habitats that is provided in the Fishing Gear Effects on 
Marine Habitats Database. This rule therefore complies with the MSA and 
its implementing regulations. The Analysis prepared for the rule is 
based on the most up-to-date scientific information available (see 
additional explanation under the Response 4 below) and

[[Page 37344]]

discloses and evaluates potential impacts from fishing to groundfish 
EFH in the Cordell Bank area. Additionally, the Groundfish FMP (which 
is incorporated by reference in the Analysis) describes groundfish EFH, 
including fishing impacts, in appendices B and C.
    Comment 2: Oceana, TIRN, and Fish On commented that opening up the 
10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq km) area to bottom trawling is inconsistent with 
the Council's and NMFS' precautionary approach of ``freezing the 
footprint'' of bottom trawling unless and until there is area-specific 
data indicating the absence of sensitive habitats.
    Response 2: Neither the Council nor NMFS has codified a policy of 
``freezing the footprint'' of bottom trawling off the U.S. West Coast 
as contended in the comment letters. As part of Amendment 19 to the 
Groundfish FMP, the Council and NMFS established the Seaward of 700 fm 
(1,280 m) contour closure, which was intended to preemptively close 
waters beyond the depths where bottom trawling has historically 
occurred. This closure is intended to prevent the expansion of bottom 
trawling into areas where groundfish EFH has not historically been 
adversely affected by bottom trawling. The closure is listed in Section 
6.8.7 of the Groundfish FMP and is described as the ``bottom trawl 
footprint closure''. This closure appears to be what commenters refer 
to as ``freezing the footprint'' of bottom trawling; however, Amendment 
19 instituted a depth closure as opposed to a policy generally freezing 
the footprint of bottom trawling. Additionally, as part of Amendment 28 
to the Groundfish FMP, the Council and NMFS established the Deep-Water 
Ecosystem Conservation Area (DECA) closure (>3,500 m), which was 
intended to close waters deeper than designated groundfish EFH to 
protect deep sea corals from exploratory fishing, and may have been 
mistakenly referred to as a ``footprint closure''. This action does not 
modify either of these depth closures. In summary, the Council and NMFS 
do not have a specific policy or requirement to freeze the footprint of 
bottom trawling on the West Coast, as described by the NGOs. Rather, 
when considering the exposure of seafloor habitat to bottom trawling, 
the Council and NMFS adhere to the mandates of the MSA, with regard to 
EFH protections and BSIA, on an action-by-action basis. As such, bottom 
trawling is prohibited in the expansive coastwide network of existing 
bottom trawl EFHCAs, which includes 152,355 sq mi (394,598 sq km) of 
area that has been reviewed through the Council's EFH process and 
specifically designated as in need of protection from bottom trawling. 
The existing bottom trawl EFHCA in the Cordell Bank area covers all but 
10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq km) of the former Cordell Bank GCA footprint. This 
EFHCA was reviewed during the 2014 EFH review process and appropriately 
expanded via Amendment 28 to the Groundfish FMP (84 FR 63966, November 
19, 2019). When considering this action, the Council used the most 
updated information available on habitat in the Cordell Bank area to 
evaluate potential EFH impacts, and this information indicates that the 
small area newly opened to bottom trawling is predominantly sandy 
bottom (see Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 of the Analysis). Accordingly, 
this action is consistent with the MSA, implementing regulations, and 
Council and NMFS policies. If new information is presented at the next 
EFH review that warrants further expansion of the bottom trawl EFHCA in 
the Cordell Bank area, or other West Coast EFHCAs, then the Council may 
recommend that approach to NMFS at that time.
    Comment 3: Three NGOs, including Oceana, Turtle Island Restoration 
Network, and Fish On, claimed that NMFS violated NEPA's requirement to 
evaluate a reasonable range of alternatives. Specifically, Oceana 
comments that NMFS' range of alternatives was insufficient because it 
lacked an alternative that maintained prohibitions on all bottom 
contacting fishing gear. Similarly, TIRN comments that NMFS did not 
meaningfully evaluate an alternative that would keep all existing 
bottom-trawl closures in place and limit the reopening to non-trawl 
gear; or an alternative with different boundaries for the new GEA that 
would avoid more sensitive habitats or that would delay reopening until 
additional habitat mapping is completed.
    Response 3: NEPA requires Federal agencies to take a hard look at 
the environmental consequences of their actions. To meet its NEPA 
obligations for this action, NMFS completed an Environmental Assessment 
(EA). NEPA does not specify a minimum requirement for the number of 
alternatives to be evaluated; NEPA requires that the range simply be 
reasonable (42 U.S.C. 4331(2)(H)). NOAA's Policy and Procedures for 
Compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act and Related 
Authorities define reasonable alternatives as those that are 
technically and economically feasible and meet the purpose and need of 
the proposed action. An EA may include only the preferred and no action 
alternatives (Companion Manual for NOAA Administrative Order 216-6A, 
Section XIV (U)). This guidance is supported by Federal case law. See, 
e.g., Earth Island Institute v. U.S. Forest Service, 87 F.4th 1054 (9th 
Cir. 2023) (an agency satisfies NEPA when it considers only two 
alternatives); City of Los Angeles v. Federal Aviation Administration, 
63 F.4th 835 (9th Cir. 2023) (a court determines whether an agency 
considered a reasonable range of alternatives based on its purpose and 
need). The stated purpose and need for this action is: The purpose of 
this action is to provide fishing access to previously closed areas 
surrounding Cordell Bank while protecting sensitive habitats. The 
Cordell Bank GCA was initially implemented to reduce catch of several 
overfished groundfish stocks, which are all now rebuilt or rebuilding 
ahead of schedule. This action is needed to remove unnecessary 
regulations and to reduce regulatory complexity. The EA for this action 
evaluated two alternatives: keeping the prior Cordell Bank GCA 
regulations in place (No Action), or removing the Cordell Bank GCA and 
replacing it with a new GEA over the Cordell Bank bottom contact EFHCA 
that would be applicable to all groundfish fisheries (the Preferred 
Alternative). No additional alternatives were necessary to complete a 
reasonable range. As stated in the purpose and need, the primary 
groundfish stocks of concern that motivated the implementation of the 
GCA are now rebuilt. Thus, the Cordell Bank GCA met its purpose and is 
no longer necessary for the management of overfished stocks. The action 
alternative meets the need of reducing regulatory complexity in the 
Cordell Bank area, and the EA evaluated potential impacts resulting 
from the action on sensitive habitat, including EFH. Accordingly, the 
two alternatives evaluated were sufficient under NEPA; particularly in 
this case where NMFS determined in its EA that the action would not 
have a significant impact on the environment.
    Comment 4: Fourth, Oceana, TIRN, and Fish On commented that NMFS 
violated the MSA's National Standard 2 (i.e., the requirement that 
fishery conservation and management measures be based on BSIA) because 
NMFS did not adequately consider recent data from the Office of 
National Marine Sanctuaries documenting extensive hard and mixed 
substrates, as well as coral and sponge communities, on and around 
Cordell Bank.
    Response 4: The Analysis for this action used and evaluated the 
BSIA on habitat and benthic substrate. The data specifically referenced 
by Oceana and

[[Page 37345]]

TIRN was not publicly available during the development of the Analysis, 
nor had it been peer-reviewed. However, once aware of the new data, the 
Council and NMFS coordinated with the Office of National Marine 
Sanctuaries to incorporate the information into the Analysis. All new 
data from the Office of National Marine Sanctuaries, which includes 
predictive habitat classification and additional coral and sea sponge 
observations, is displayed in the Analysis in Figures 8 through 13. 
This information was considered by the Council prior to making their 
final recommendation to NMFS. As stated in the Analysis (see Section 
3.2.1), and as supported by the BSIA, the majority of hard substrate 
and coral and sponge observations in the Cordell Bank area will remain 
inside the new Cordell Bank GEA.
    Comment 5: Oceana, TIRN, Fish On, and Earth Island Institute either 
specifically or generally commented that NMFS failed to follow the 
directive and mandates of the National Marine Sanctuaries Act (NMSA) to 
protect sanctuary resources and the Cordell Bank NMS designation 
because the rule reopens areas to bottom contact fishing in Cordell 
Bank and because the rule reopens these areas without adequate 
safeguards in place. Relatedly, Oceana and TIRN also claim that NMFS 
lacks a monitoring framework sufficient to detect and assess impacts to 
benthic habitats, EFH, or protected species.
    Response 5: NMFS finds that the fishing area being opened has 
adequate safeguards in place to minimize, to the extent practicable, 
the effects of fishing on EFH and protect sanctuary resources 
consistent with both the MSA and the NMSA. The NMSA provides the 
authority for the Secretary of Commerce to designate a discrete area of 
the marine environment as a national marine sanctuary and to promulgate 
regulations implementing such designation, if the area is determined to 
be of special national significance due to (1) its conservation, 
recreational, ecological, historical, scientific, cultural, 
archaeological, educational, or esthetic qualities; (2) the communities 
of living marine resources it harbors; or (3) its resource or human-use 
values (16 U.S.C. 1433(a)). The Cordell Bank NMS was designated in 1989 
to protect an approximately 400 sq mi (1,036 sq km) area consisting of 
a nutrient-rich, offshore rocky bank off the coast of California. The 
designation explained that, ``Cordell Bank and its surrounding waters, 
because of a rare combination of oceanic conditions and undersea 
topography, provide a highly productive marine environment in a 
discrete, well defined area'' (54 FR 22417, May 24, 1989). Under the 
NMSA, the terms of a sanctuary designation include the types of 
activities that will be subject to regulation by the Secretary to 
protect a specific sanctuary's characteristics (16 U.S.C. 1433(a)). The 
Cordell Bank NMS designation specifically authorizes the regulation of 
five types of activities within the sanctuary, not including fishing 
(54 FR 22417, May 24, 1989). With respect to fishing, the designation 
``reaffirms that no regulation of fishing, other than by existing State 
and Federal statutes, will occur'' and that ``[a]ll State and Federal 
regulatory programs pertaining to fishing, including Fishery Management 
Plans promulgated under the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and 
Management Act, remain in effect''. Stated differently, the Cordell 
Bank NMS designation provides that fishing within the area will 
continue to be regulated through Council and NMFS action, consistent 
with this rulemaking. Of the 64 sq mi (165.8 sq km) footprint of the 
former Cordell Bank GCA, all but 10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq km) will remain 
inside of a protective closure--either an EFHCA, the new GEA, or both. 
For the fishing activity that does take place in the newly opened area, 
participating vessels will remain subject to their sector's respective 
management measures, including but not limited to carrying a vessel 
monitoring system that tracks fishing location (commercial trawl and 
non-trawl sectors), species-specific catch limits/bag limits/quotas 
(all sectors), gear limitations (varies across all sectors; e.g., 
maximum hook requirements in the recreational sector), logbook 
reporting (commercial trawl and non-trawl sectors), seasonal depth 
restrictions (recreational sector), partial observer coverage (non-
trawl commercial sector), 100 percent observer coverage or electronic 
monitoring (trawl sector), and the requirement to carry and use a 
descending device when returning discarded fish to depth (recreational 
sector). Even in the 10.2 sq mi (26.4 sq km) that is now open to all 
bottom contact gear, NMFS is adjusting the regulations such that the 
prohibition on using large footrope trawl gear shallower than 100 fm 
(183 m) is maintained to mitigate seafloor damage (see Removal of the 
Cordell Bank GCA above and in the same section of the proposed rule). 
NMFS finds these protections and required monitoring measures in the 
newly opened areas, including within the limited area newly opened to 
bottom trawl, to be adequate to detect and assess impacts to benthic 
habitats, EFH, or protected species within the sanctuary, and thus to 
protect sanctuary resources and minimize to the extent practicable, the 
effects of fishing on EFH.
    Comment 6: Last, Oceana and TIRN comment that the removal of 
spatial protections under the Cordell Bank GCA is particularly 
concerning when considered together with other recent actions 
recommended by the Council, including the removal or reclassification 
of select stocks in the Groundfish FMP. The NGOs argue that 
cumulatively the actions diminish safeguards for ecologically important 
habitats and sensitive species.
    Response 6: NMFS disagrees with this comment. The removal of stocks 
from, or reclassification of stocks as Ecosystem Component (EC) species 
within, the Groundfish FMP does not adversely (or otherwise) impact 
spatial protections in the Cordell Bank area, including those 
protections provided by the EFHCAs or the new GEA, or otherwise 
diminish safeguards for habitats or sensitive species. In a separate 
action, subject to full evaluation under the MSA and its implementing 
regulations, NEPA, and other applicable law, the Council and NMFS, 
consistent with their jurisdiction, have evaluated those stocks 
currently managed in the Groundfish FMP to determine if they are in 
need of conservation and management within the EEZ. This is a robust, 
stock- and fact-specific analysis. See 50 CFR 300.605(c). Following 
this evaluation, certain stocks will be proposed to be removed from the 
Groundfish FMP or re-classified as EC species. Any related future 
rulemakings will be subject to MSA and NEPA review and public notice 
and comment. Potential reasonably foreseeable effects of these future 
actions will appropriately be considered at that time. For the purposes 
of this final rule, even if a target species in the Cordell Bank area 
is taken out of the FMP at a future time and no longer Federally-
managed, participating fishing vessels would still be subject to catch 
limits and any other management measures dictated by the State of 
California.

Classification

    Pursuant to sections 303(c) and 304(b)(1)(A) of the Magnuson-
Stevens Act, the NMFS Assistant Administrator has determined that this 
rule is consistent with the Pacific Coast Groundfish FMP, other 
provisions of the Magnuson-Stevens Act, and other applicable law.

[[Page 37346]]

Administrative Procedures Act

    There is good cause under 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(3) to make the rule 
effective immediately upon filing with the Office of the Federal 
Register as delaying the effectiveness of this rule would be contrary 
to the public interest. This rule effectuates the long-awaited opening 
of the Cordell Bank GCA, which will restore access to historical 
fishing grounds to groundfish fishermen in Central California. This 
rule will primarily benefit recreational fishermen in the San Francisco 
Management Area; specifically, fishermen running charter boats out of 
San Francisco and Bodega Bay. The rule is also likely to benefit non-
trawl commercial fishermen fishing off Central California. A delayed 
effective date for this rule would be contrary to the public interest 
as it could have a substantial adverse economic impact on fishery 
participants and fishing communities.
    The 2026 recreational fishery in the San Francisco Management Area 
opened on April 1, 2026, and will close on December 31, 2026. Though 
the season is 9 months long, the summer (June through August) is by far 
the fishery's busiest season. This busy season aligns with the summer 
tourist season, and with good weather conditions for fishing, in and 
off Central California. In recent years, participants in the California 
recreational fishery have struggled economically due to decreased 
fishing opportunities along the coast, including the lack of salmon 
fishing opportunity. For these fishery participants, the opening of the 
Cordell Bank GCA creates an important new fishing and economic 
opportunity and business plans and decisions for 2026 were likely made 
surrounding the anticipated opening of the GCA prior to the fishery's 
busy summer season. The Cordell Bank GCA was one of many fishery 
closures implemented along the U.S. West Coast in the early 2000s to 
protect overfished groundfish species. These closures resulted in 
significant adverse socio-economic impacts for fishermen and fishing 
communities. All of the once-overfished species are now rebuilt or 
rebuilding ahead of schedule and, in 2019, NMFS began restoring access 
to previously closed areas. The Council recommended this action to open 
the Cordell Bank GCA in March 2025. Accordingly, the relevant fishery 
stakeholders initially anticipated that this rule would be effective by 
January 1, 2026. NMFS has received feedback from fishery participants 
that business plans were made with the expectation that the GCA would 
be open for fishing before the recreational fishery opened on April 1, 
2026. A delay in the effectiveness of this rule would result in further 
delay in the opening of the Cordell Bank GCA, beyond the date that the 
affected public was expecting; therefore, it would result in economic 
harm to fishery participants and fishing communities by continuing to 
constrain recreational fishing opportunity off the Central California 
coast during the fishery's busy summer season.
    Making this rule effective upon filing with the Office of Federal 
Register is also in the public interest because it will benefit the 
public by providing additional opportunity for recreational fishermen 
in 2026 to fully utilize the California recreational fishery's annual 
groundfish allocations. According to information provided by the 
California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW), the groundfish 
species targeted in and around the Cordell Bank GCA are generally 
underattained. Specifically, based on available data, CDFW has 
indicated that species that would likely be targeted by the 
recreational sector at Cordell Bank are highly underattained, with most 
species tracking at 40% or less attainment of their fishery harvest 
guideline or the overall non-trawl allocation. Opening the Cordell Bank 
GCA to fishing immediately, and particularly during the busy summer 
season, would therefore increase the likelihood of full utilization of 
the 2026 groundfish allocations. As such, making this rule effective 
immediately upon filing with the Office of the Federal Register would 
be consistent with the public interest, as it would support the 
Magnuson-Stevens Act's goal of promoting optimal yield within the 
fishery.
    Finally, a delayed effective date is not necessary to provide 
sufficient notice to the fishing community. The purpose of the 30-day 
delayed effectiveness provision of the APA is generally to give the 
regulated community time to adjust to new regulations. The opening of 
historical fishing grounds creates no new restriction or requirement 
that warrants such time for adjustment. The only fishing area being 
newly closed as part of the GEA is the 2.5 sq mi (6.5 sq km) that prior 
allowed the use of non-bottom contact gear. Otherwise, the rest of the 
GEA includes area that is already closed, as it is within the 
geographic footprint of the former GCA. Moreover, the Cordell Bank GCA 
is no longer needed for its original purpose--to protect groundfish 
species. Therefore, it is in the public interest to increase fishing 
access on the California coast as soon as possible and good cause 
exists to waive the 30-day delay in effectiveness under 5 U.S.C. 
553(d)(3). Increasing fishing access in the Cordell Bank area 
immediately upon the filing of this rule with the Office of Federal 
Register will provide additional opportunity for groundfish fishermen 
in 2026, which will increase the likelihood of full utilization of 
annual groundfish allocations.

Executive Order 12866

    This final rule has been determined to be not significant for 
purposes of Executive Order (E.O.) 12866.

Executive Order 14192

    This final rule is not an E.O. 14192 regulatory action because this 
rule is not significant under E.O. 12866.

Executive Order 13175

    A Tribal summary impact statement under section (5)(b)(2)(B) and 
(c)(2) of E.O. 13175 was not required for this final rule because this 
action does not impose substantial direct compliance costs on Indian 
Tribal Governments, as the action area is outside of the Usual and 
Accustomed fishing areas for tribes with Federally-recognized treaties 
to fish for groundfish. Therefore, a Tribal summary impact statement is 
not required and has not been prepared.

Regulatory Impact Review (RIR)

    An RIR was prepared to assess all costs and benefits of available 
regulatory alternatives. A copy of this Analysis is available from NMFS 
(see ADDRESSES section). NMFS is recommending this final rule based on 
its assessment of the net benefits of these measures.

Regulatory Flexibility Act

    The Chief Counsel for Regulation, Department of Commerce, certified 
to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small Business Administration 
during the proposed rule stage that this action will not have a 
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. 
The factual basis for this certification was published in the proposed 
rule and is not repeated here. No comments were received regarding this 
certification. As a result, a final regulatory flexibility analysis was 
not required and none was prepared.

Paperwork Reduction Act

    This final rule contains no new information collection requirements 
under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995.

List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 660

    Fisheries, Fishing, Fishing vessels.

[[Page 37347]]

    Dated: June 16, 2026.
Samuel D. Rauch III,
Deputy Assistant Administrator for Regulatory Programs, National Marine 
Fisheries Service.

    For the reasons set out in the preamble, NMFS amends 50 CFR part 
660 as follows:

PART 660--FISHERIES OFF WEST COAST STATES

0
1. The authority citation for part 660 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  16 U.S.C. 1801 et seq., 16 U.S.C. 773 et seq., and 
16 U.S.C. 7001 et seq.

0
2. Amend Sec.  660.11 by:
0
a. In the definition for ``Conservation area(s)'':
0
i. Revising introductory text and paragraph (1) introductory text;
0
ii. Removing paragraphs (1)(iii) and (1)(v);
0
iii. Redesignating paragraph (1)(iv) as paragraph (1)(iii) and 
paragraphs (1)(vi) and (1)(vii) as paragraphs (1)(iv) and (1)(v);
0
iv. Adding paragraph (4); and
0
b. Revising the definition of ``Continuous transiting or transit 
through''.
    The revisions and addition read as follows:

Sec.  660.11  General definitions.

* * * * *
    Conservation area(s) means an enclosed geographic area defined by 
coordinates expressed in degrees of latitude and longitude where NMFS 
may prohibit fishing with particular gear types. Conservation areas 
include Groundfish Conservation Areas (GCA), Essential Fish Habitat 
Conservation Areas (EFHCA), Deep-sea Ecosystem Conservation Areas 
(DECA) and Groundfish Exclusion Areas (GEA).
    (1) Groundfish Conservation Area or GCA means a conservation area 
created or modified and enforced to control catch of groundfish or 
protected species. Regulations at Sec.  660.60(c)(3) describe the 
various purposes for which NMFS may implement certain types of GCAs 
through routine management measures. Regulations at Sec.  660.70 
further describe and define coordinates for certain GCAs, including 
Yelloweye Rockfish Conservation Areas and Cowcod Conservation Areas. 
GCAs also include closures bounded by the EEZ or depth-based lines 
approximating depth contours, including Bycatch Reduction Areas or 
BRAs, or bounded by depth contours and lines of latitude, including 
Block Area Closures, or BACs, and Rockfish Conservation Areas, or RCAs, 
which may be closed to fishing with particular gear types. BRA, BAC, 
and RCA boundaries may change seasonally according to conservation 
needs. Regulations at Sec. Sec.  660.71 through 660.74, and 660.76 
define depth-based boundary lines with latitude/longitude coordinates 
that may be used to enact depth-based closures. Regulations in this 
section describe commonly used geographic coordinates that define lines 
of latitude. Fishing prohibitions associated with GCAs are in addition 
to those associated with other conservation areas.
* * * * *
    (4) Groundfish Exclusion Areas or GEAs are closed areas intended to 
mitigate potential impacts to sensitive environments from certain 
groundfish fishing activity. GEAs may prohibit fishing by certain 
groundfish sectors or certain groundfish gear types. Geographic 
coordinates for GEAs are defined at Sec.  660.70.
* * * * *
    Continuous transiting or transit through means that a vessel 
crosses a conservation area on a heading as nearly as practicable to a 
direct route, consistent with navigational safety, while maintaining 
expeditious headway throughout the transit without loitering or delay.
* * * * *

0
3. Amend Sec.  660.70 by:
0
a. Revising the section heading, paragraph (a), paragraph (t) 
introductory text;
0
b. Adding paragraph (t)(10); and
0
c. Removing paragraph (u).
    The revisions and addition read as follows:

Sec.  660.70  Groundfish Conservation Areas and Groundfish Exclusion 
Areas.

    (a) General. Groundfish conservation area (GCA) and groundfish 
exclusion area (GEA) are defined in Sec.  660.11. This section defines 
GCAs and GEAs whose shapes are not exclusively defined by boundary 
lines approximating depth contours found in Sec. Sec.  660.71 through 
660.74 or commonly used geographic coordinates at Sec.  660.11. Fishing 
activity that is prohibited or permitted within a particular GCA or GEA 
is detailed at subparts C through G of part 660.
* * * * *
    (t) Groundfish Exclusion Areas. The Groundfish Exclusion Areas 
(GEAs) are closed areas intended to protect sensitive areas, including 
areas with coral and sea pens. GEAs are closed to both commercial and 
recreational groundfish fisheries unless otherwise noted.
* * * * *
    (10) Cordell Bank. The Cordell Bank GEA is defined by the straight 
lines connecting the following specific latitude and longitude 
coordinates in the order listed and connecting back to 37[deg]57.62' N 
lat., 123[deg]24.22' W long.:
    (i) 37[deg]57.62' N lat., 123[deg]24.22' W long.;
    (ii) 37[deg]57.70' N lat., 123[deg]25.25' W long.;
    (iii) 37[deg]59.47' N lat., 123[deg]26.63' W long.;
    (iv) 38[deg]00.24' N lat., 123[deg]27.87' W long.;
    (v) 38[deg]00.98' N lat., 123[deg]27.65' W long.;
    (vi) 38[deg]02.81' N lat., 123[deg]28.75' W long.;
    (vii) 38[deg]04.26' N lat., 123[deg]29.25' W long.;
    (viii) 38[deg]04.55' N lat., 123[deg]28.32' W long.;
    (ix) 38[deg]03.87' N lat., 123[deg]27.69' W long.;
    (x) 38[deg]04.27' N lat., 123[deg]26.68' W long.;
    (xi) 38[deg]02.67' N lat., 123[deg]24.17' W long.;
    (xii) 38[deg]00.87' N lat., 123[deg]23.15' W long.;
    (xiii) 37[deg]59.32' N lat., 123[deg]22.52' W long.; and
    (xvi) 37[deg]58.24' N lat., 123[deg]23.16' W long.

0
4. Amend Sec.  660.73 by redesignating paragraphs (b) through (y) as 
paragraphs (c) through (z), and adding new paragraph (b) to read as 
follows:

Sec.  660.73  Latitude/longitude coordinates defining the 100 fm (183 
m) through 150 fm (274 m) depth contours.

* * * * *
    (b) Cordell Bank 100 fm ring. The 100-fm (183-m) depth contour 
around Cordell Bank off the State of California is defined by straight 
lines connecting all of the following points in the order stated:
    (1) 38[deg]03.18' N lat., 123[deg]20.77' W long.;
    (2) 38[deg]06.29' N lat., 123[deg]25.03' W long.;
    (3) 38[deg]06.34' N lat., 123[deg]29.32' W long.;
    (4) 38[deg]04.57' N lat., 123[deg]31.30' W long.;
    (5) 38[deg]02.32' N lat., 123[deg]31.07' W long.;
    (6) 38[deg]00.00' N lat., 123[deg]28.40' W long.;
    (7) 37[deg]58.10' N lat., 123[deg]26.66' W long.;
    (8) 37[deg]55.07' N lat., 123[deg]26.81' W long.;
    (9) 38[deg]00.00' N lat., 123[deg]23.08' W long.; and connecting 
back to 38[deg]03.18' N lat., 123[deg]20.77' W long.
* * * * *

[[Page 37348]]

0
5. Amend Sec.  660.130 by:
0
a. Removing paragraph (e)(2);
0
b. Redesignating paragraph (e)(3) through (e)(7) as (e)(2) through 
(e)(6); and
0
c. Adding paragraph (h)
    The addition reads as follows:

Sec.  660.130  Trawl fishery--management measures.

* * * * *
    (h) Groundfish Exclusion Areas (GEAs). GEAs are closed areas 
defined by specific latitude and longitude coordinates (specified at 
Sec.  660.70) where recreational and/or commercial fishing for 
groundfish is prohibited unless otherwise noted at Sec.  660.70(t). It 
is unlawful to fish for, take and retain, possess (except for the 
purpose of continuous transit) or land groundfish within the GEAs 
unless otherwise specified at Sec.  660.70(t). All prohibited fishing 
gear for targeting groundfish, as specified at Sec.  660.70(t), must be 
stowed while transiting through a GEA. If fishing for non-groundfish 
species within a GEA, where all groundfish fishing is prohibited, then 
no groundfish may be on board the vessel.

0
6. Amend Sec.  660.230 by removing paragraphs (d)(15) and (16) and 
adding paragraph (h) to read as follows:

Sec.  660.230  Fixed gear fishery--management measures.

* * * * *
    (h) Groundfish exclusion areas (GEAs). GEAs are closed areas 
defined by specific latitude and longitude coordinates (specified at 
Sec.  660.70) where recreational and/or commercial fishing for 
groundfish is prohibited unless otherwise noted at Sec.  660.70(t). It 
is unlawful to fish for, take and retain, possess (except for the 
purpose of continuous transit) or land groundfish within the GEAs 
unless otherwise specified at Sec.  660.70(t). All prohibited fishing 
gear for targeting groundfish, as specified at Sec.  660.70(t), must be 
stowed while transiting through a GEA. If fishing for non-groundfish 
species within a GEA, where all groundfish fishing is prohibited, then 
no groundfish may be on board the vessel.

0
7. Amend Sec.  660.330 by removing paragraphs (d)(17) and (18), and 
adding paragraph (h) to read as follows:

Sec.  660.330  Open access fishery--management measures.

* * * * *
    (h) Groundfish exclusion areas (GEAs). GEAs are closed areas 
defined by specific latitude and longitude coordinates (specified at 
Sec.  660.70) where recreational and/or commercial fishing for 
groundfish is prohibited unless otherwise noted at Sec.  660.70(t). It 
is unlawful to fish for, take and retain, possess (except for the 
purpose of continuous transit) or land groundfish within the GEAs 
unless otherwise specified at Sec.  660.70(t). All prohibited fishing 
gear for targeting groundfish, as specified at Sec.  660.70(t), must be 
stowed while transiting through a GEA. If fishing for non-groundfish 
species within a GEA, where all groundfish fishing is prohibited, then 
no groundfish may be on board the vessel.

0
8. Amend Sec.  660.360 by:
0
a. Revising paragraphs (c)(3)(i)(A)(3) and (B);
0
b. Removing paragraph (c)(3)(i)(C); and
0
c. Redesignating paragraphs (c)(3)(i)(D) through (I) as paragraphs 
(c)(3)(i)(C) through (H).
    The revisions read as follows:

Sec.  660.360  Recreational fishery--management measures.

* * * * *
    (c) * * *
    (3) * * *
    (i) * * *
    (A) * * *
    (3) Between 38[deg]57.50' N lat. and 37[deg]11' N lat. (San 
Francisco Management Area), recreational fishing for the RCG Complex 
and lingcod is closed in the EEZ from January 1 through March 31, is 
prohibited in the EEZ shoreward of the boundary line approximating the 
50-fm (91-m) depth contour along the mainland coast and along islands 
and offshore seamounts from April 1 through April 30, is closed in the 
EEZ from May 1 to September 30, is prohibited in the EEZ shoreward of 
the boundary line approximating the 50-fm (91-m) depth contour along 
the mainland coast and along islands and offshore seamounts from 
October 1 through October 31, is closed in the EEZ from November 1 
through November 30, and is prohibited in the EEZ shoreward of the 
boundary line approximating the 50-fm (91-m) depth contour along the 
mainland coast and along islands and offshore seamounts from December 1 
through December 31.
* * * * *
    (B) Groundfish exclusion areas (GEAs). GEAs are closed areas 
defined by specific latitude and longitude coordinates (specified at 
Sec.  660.70) where recreational and/or commercial fishing for 
groundfish is prohibited unless otherwise noted at Sec.  660.70(t). It 
is unlawful to fish for, take and retain, possess (except for the 
purpose of continuous transit) or land groundfish within the GEAs 
unless otherwise specified at Sec.  660.70(t). Recreational fishing 
gear for targeting groundfish may not be deployed while transiting 
through a GEA. If fishing for non-groundfish species within a GEA, then 
no groundfish may be on board the vessel.
* * * * *

[FR Doc. 2026-12566 Filed 6-22-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3510-22-P