[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 119 (Tuesday, June 23, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 37321-37332]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12547]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Maritime Administration

46 CFR Part 294

[Docket Number MARAD-2022-0247]
RIN 2133-AB95

Tanker Security Program

AGENCY: Maritime Administration (MARAD), U.S. Department of 
Transportation (DOT).

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: This final rule implements the Tanker Security Program (TSP) 
and makes certain changes to the TSP

[[Page 37322]]

interim final rule (IFR) published in the Federal Register on December 
7, 2022, in response to public comments received on the IFR, feedback 
from stakeholders, and MARAD's own experience during initial program 
administration. The Secretary of Transportation is authorized to 
establish TSP, comprised of a fleet of active, commercially viable, 
militarily useful, privately owned product tank vessels of the United 
States. The TSP Fleet is intended to meet national defense and other 
security requirements and maintain a United States presence in 
international commercial shipping. TSP supports the United States 
maritime industries and workforce to promote national security and 
economic resilience.

DATES: This final rule is effective July 23, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: David Hatcher, Deputy Associate 
Administrator for Commercial Sealift, at (202) 366-0688, or via email 
at   [email&#160;protected]  . You may send mail to Mr. Hatcher at U.S. 
Department of Transportation, Maritime Administration, Office of 
Sealift Support, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Room W25-310, Mail Stop 1, 
Washington, DC 20590.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Electronic Access and Filing

    This final rule and all comments may be viewed online through the 
Federal eRulemaking portal at  www.regulations.gov . An electronic copy 
of this document may also be downloaded by accessing the Office of the 
Federal Register's home page at:  www.federalregister.gov .

Background

    Per 46 U.S.C. 53402, as enacted by Section 3511(a) of NDAA FY21, 
the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Secretary of 
War, is required to establish a fleet of active, commercially viable, 
militarily useful, privately owned product tank vessels to meet 
national defense and other security requirements. NDAA FY22 section 
3515(b) amended the eligibility requirements of vessels in TSP to 
disqualify any vessel under charter to the United States Government for 
any period that, together with options, exceeds 180 continuous days. 
TSP provides a stipend to tanker operators of U.S.-flagged vessels that 
meet certain qualifications and operate in accordance with operating 
agreements issued by MARAD in accordance with 46 U.S.C. 53401-12. TSP 
supports the United States maritime industries and workforce to promote 
national security and economic competitiveness as articulated in 
Executive Order (E.O.) 14269 (90 FR 15635-41; Apr. 15, 2025).
    TSP currently authorizes payments to participating operators of 
$8.16 million per ship, per fiscal year, subject to annual 
appropriations. Participating operators are required to make their 
commercial transportation resources available upon request by the 
Secretary of War for military purposes during times of war or national 
emergency.

National Defense Requirement

    A fuel tanker study required by Section 3519 of the NDAA for Fiscal 
Year 2020 (Pub. L. 116-92, Dec. 20, 2019) (NDAA FY20) examined the 
sufficiency of the U.S.-flagged tanker fleet to meet National Defense 
Strategy (NDS) requirements. A summary of the report was provided on 
the docket for the IFR. The report's summary found a substantial risk 
to the Nation's defense associated with a heavy reliance on foreign-
flagged tankers, particularly within a contested environment. The 
location, timing, and specific missions associated with some tanker 
requirements dictate the need for U.S.-flagged assets, for which there 
are currently insufficient numbers available. The report's gap analysis 
found a clear and critical need for a tanker security program to 
increase U.S.-flagged tanker capacity, to reduce the risk of reliance 
on foreign-flagged tankers for the most important fuel missions, and to 
ensure the Department of War (DOW) \1\ has sufficient tanker 
capabilities to meet NDS objectives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Reference to the Department of War is made pursuant to E.O. 
14347, Restoring the United States Department of War (90 FR 43893 
(Sept. 10, 2025).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In response to the NDAA FY20 Fuel Tanker Study, in the NDAA FY21, 
Congress directed the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with 
the Secretary of War, to establish a fleet of active, commercially 
viable, militarily useful, privately-owned product tanker vessels to 
meet national defense and other security requirements and maintain a 
United States presence in international commercial shipping.\2\ The 
Maritime Administration worked with the DOW's United States 
Transportation Command to identify and shape TSP requirements and 
timelines.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ The tanker security program authority is codified at 46 
U.S.C. 53402-53412.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Statutory Implementation

    Consistent with NDAA FY21, the rule establishes requirements that 
support typical DOT and MARAD commercial economic objectives such as 
the tanker vessel eligibility requirements in MARAD's regulations at 46 
CFR 294.9. Specifically, tanker vessels must be commercially viable, be 
not more than 10 years in age, and operate in U.S. foreign commerce. In 
addition, Sec.  294.9 requires tanker vessels to be suitable for use by 
the United States for national defense or military purposes in time of 
war or national emergency, as determined by the Secretary of War. 
Section 294.11 also requires vessel owners, charterers, and operators 
to meet certain requirements of NDAA FY21 to establish their corporate 
citizenship to ensure security through proper operational control. 
Section 294.25 requires a TSP participant to agree to install onboard 
its vessel militarily useful features as approved by the U.S. Coast 
Guard and the vessel's classification society. Section 294.23(d) 
requires TSP participants to enter into the Voluntary Tanker Agreement, 
which is an emergency preparedness agreement by which TSP participants 
commit to making commercial transportation resources (including 
services) available for military use, upon request by the Secretary of 
War during a time of war or national emergency, or whenever the 
Secretary of War determines that it is necessary for national security 
or contingency operation. Section 294.31 also provides for annual 
payments to program participants and specifies payment conditions set 
forth in the statute. Taken together, the TSP supports both the 
Nation's economy and its national security by strengthening and 
ensuring the continued availability of U.S.-flag tanker capacity.
    Since the publication of the IFR in 2022, MARAD, in conjunction 
with United States Transportation Command, has awarded TSP Operating 
Agreements covering the operation of product tank vessels in TSP, and 
those vessels have begun operation in the Tanker Security Fleet.

Summary of Changes From IFR

    MARAD has made several changes to this Final Rule from the IFR, one 
pursuant to a comment and others following additional analysis by 
MARAD. The first change clarifies that a vessel operating in TSP placed 
under a long-term charter to the Government (defined as any charter 
that, together with options, occurs for more than 180 continuous 
calendar days) only becomes ineligible to participate in TSP on the 
date and time on which the vessel is actually delivered to, and 
accepted by, the Government for operation under the charter. One 
commenter proposed this modification (see Comments on the

[[Page 37323]]

Interim Final Rule, below), and MARAD incorporates this change into 
Sec.  294.21(e).
    MARAD has also updated the duration of the operating agreements to 
reflect statutory updates to the program since its initial enactment. 
The IFR defined operating agreements as annual agreements that 
automatically renewed each year until the end of FY 2035 in accordance 
with the original authorizing statute. Congress extended TSP's 
authorization to 2040 under section 3531(b) of the NDAA for Fiscal Year 
2025 (Pub. L. 118-159 (Dec. 23, 2024)) (NDAA FY25), and MARAD 
accordingly has extended the authorization period of the operating 
agreements to the end of FY 2040. MARAD also clarified that obligations 
under the operating agreements are subject to actual appropriations for 
any given fiscal year and that MARAD may enter into new operating 
agreements after the start of the initial ten operating agreements. Any 
such agreements are also authorized through the end of FY 2040.
    MARAD has modified Sec. Sec.  294.21 and 294.31 to make clear that, 
in the event that appropriations for TSP payments are lower than the 
authorized amount, all current participants would receive stipend 
payments pro rata based on the appropriated amount. MARAD would not 
renew operating agreements for lack of funding only if Congress does 
not appropriate any money toward TSP, e.g., an extended Government 
shutdown. The ability to maintain payments to program participants at 
appropriated levels, even if lower than authorized levels, ensures that 
TSP remains as close to maximum readiness as possible, which is 
critical should there be a sudden crisis, armed conflict, or national 
emergency requiring the use of these vessels by the Government to meet 
urgent needs.
    MARAD is clarifying Sec.  294.23(d) to promote the sustainability 
of the Tanker Security Fleet in the event of a national security event. 
Under 46 U.S.C. 53407 and 46 CFR 294.23(d), all vessels operating in 
TSP must enter into a Voluntary Tanker Agreement (VTA), in which they 
commit to make their TSP vessel available to fulfill DOW requirements 
in times of war or national emergency. MARAD has clarified that a 
vessel activated under the VTA \3\ is not considered to be operating 
under a long-term charter to the United States for purposes of the 
statute and this rule. In the absence of a VTA activation, a Government 
charter lasting more than 180 days would make the vessel ineligible to 
remain in the TSP. As charters of vessels pursuant to a VTA activation 
are not made under normal commercial conditions but to fulfill 
contingency operation requirements, disqualification of any vessel due 
to its national security obligations would fundamentally frustrate the 
program's purpose.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ The VTA program was renewed and the VTA form was revised in 
2022 (87 FR 67119-26, Nov. 7, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    MARAD has also clarified that it will not terminate a TSP Operating 
Agreement if the TSP vessel has been activated under VTA, suffers a 
marine casualty while operating pursuant to the activation, and the 
Agreement Holder makes all reasonable and timely efforts to either 
repair or replace the vessel, as determined by MARAD. As VTA 
participation is a statutory requirement, an Operating Agreement 
termination for failure to operate a qualified vessel when the failure 
results from a VTA-related marine casualty could undermine the goals of 
the TSP Program. However, carriers also have a responsibility to 
operate and maintain qualified vessels under TSP Operating Agreements, 
and MARAD will ensure that, in the event of a marine casualty during a 
VTA activation, the Agreement Holder makes all reasonable and timely 
efforts to resume TSP operations. Further, this new subparagraph does 
not obligate MARAD to continue TSP payments to the Agreement Holder 
following the marine casualty. Accordingly, MARAD is adding Sec.  
294.23(d)(3) to ensure the stability of the Tanker Security Fleet 
during a VTA activation while also relying on MARAD's technical 
expertise to ensure proper oversight and enforcement of this provision.
    MARAD has also updated the schedule of payments in TSP to reflect 
statutory updates to the program. Section 294.31(a) of the IFR 
reflected TSP's original statutory authorization. Section 3531(a) of 
the NDAA FY 2025 both extended the authorization of TSP out to the end 
of FY 2040 and updated the payment schedule, and MARAD makes those same 
updates here, including the caveat that all such payments are subject 
to actual appropriations.
    MARAD is incorporating into the final rule Article I-8(c) of the 
Operating Agreement that all Agreement Holders must report any period 
of maintenance, survey, inspection, or repair to MARAD in advance if 
the work being done on the vessel will render it unable to move under 
its own power or makes it unable to meet its national security 
obligations under VTA on an immediate basis. Existing requirements at 
Sec.  294.31(c)(1)(v) provide that MARAD will not make payments to 
Agreement Holders for any day that a TSP Fleet Vessel is in 
maintenance, survey, inspection, or repair that exceeds 30 days per 
fiscal year unless the Agreement Holder obtains MARAD's prior 
authorization to exceed the 30-day limit. However, this does not 
provide MARAD with full visibility of the readiness of the Tanker 
Security Program Fleet at any given time, which could compromise the 
TSP Fleet's national security mission if called to respond. The 
Operating Agreement permits MARAD to request that Agreement Holders 
notify MARAD in advance of any period of maintenance, survey, 
inspection, and repair, regardless of expected duration. Accordingly, 
MARAD is adding paragraph (f) to Sec.  294.23 to require reporting of 
any period when the TSP Fleet Vessel would not be able to respond 
immediately to an emergency activation due to maintenance, survey, 
inspection, and repair. This new paragraph does not supersede the 
existing requirement at Sec.  294.31(c)(1)(v) to request extensions of 
maintenance, survey, inspection, and repair periods for TSP Fleet 
Vessels if the Agreement Holder believes they will exceed 30 days.
    MARAD updated Sec.  294.17(a) to reflect the expansion of the TSP 
Fleet since the initial enactment of 46 U.S.C. ch. 534. Section 3511(a) 
of NDAA FY 21 set the maximum TSP Fleet size at ten vessels. Section 
3501(b)(2) of the NDAA FY 2023 (Pub. L. 117-263 (Dec. 23, 2022)) 
expanded the maximum TSP Fleet size to twenty vessels starting in FY 
2024, and section 3531(c) of NDAA FY 2025 (Pub. L. 118-159 (Dec. 23, 
2024)) phased in the increase in the TSP Fleet size over a three-year 
period through a funding schedule, with funding for fifteen vessels 
authorized for FY 2025-26 and twenty vessels for FY 2027-28. MARAD 
added a clause in Sec.  294.17(a) to reflect the changes in statute and 
allow for any future TSP Fleet expansions.
    MARAD also made two clerical changes to reflect updates to the 
titles of applicable offices and officials. First, MARAD updated Sec.  
294.33(b) to reflect the change in the title of the USTRANSCOM official 
to whom carriers or applicants may direct communications when relevant. 
The prior title was the Director of Strategic Plans, Policy, and 
Logistics, but is now the Director of Strategic Plans, Policy, 
Logistics, and War-Fighting Development. Second, MARAD updated 
references from the IFR regarding the Department of Defense and 
Secretary of Defense consistent with E.O. 14347 (Sept. 5, 2025).

[[Page 37324]]

Comments on the Interim Final Rule

    In response to the publication of the IFR in the Federal Register 
on December 7, 2022 (87 FR 74977-87), which sought public comment 
concurrent with the promulgation of the IFR, MARAD received two 
separate comment submissions. MARAD responds to the comments below.
    One commenter requested that MARAD modify the language of 46 CFR 
294.21(e) to further clarify at what point vessels under long-term 
charter to the Government become ineligible to operate in TSP. We 
agree, and have updated Sec.  294.21(e) accordingly, as explained in 
Summary of Changes from IFR, above.
    The commenter expressed concern that MARAD might accept a vessel 
into TSP that was found commercially viable but would not benefit 
national security. In response, MARAD emphasizes that all vessels 
accepted for TSP must be found both commercially viable, as determined 
by MARAD, and militarily useful, as determined by U.S. Transportation 
Command. The dual requirement is specifically designed to ensure that 
TSP is comprised of the vessels that best suit the program's dual 
mandate of economic competitiveness and national security, and to 
minimize the risks to the Federal Government.
    The commenter also requested that any vessel enrolled in TSP be 
required to meet all standards of the International Maritime 
Organization, United States Coast Guard (USCG), and standards set by 
recognized classification societies. This comment is beyond the scope 
of this rulemaking because USCG is responsible for U.S. vessel 
registration and inspection, and vessels in TSP must be registered and 
inspected under United States law to qualify for participation in the 
program.
    The commenter requested that U.S.-built vessels be given selection 
priority for TSP Operating Agreements. Under 46 U.S.C. 53403(b)(2), the 
highest priority in vessel selection is its military utility, followed 
by the applicant's record of owning and operating vessels, followed by 
any other priorities MARAD considers appropriate. In the IFR at Sec.  
294.15(b), MARAD established a third priority that focuses on the 
citizenship of the applicant. Following promulgation of the IFR, the 
President issued E.O. 14269 (90 FR 15635-41 (Apr. 9, 2025)) directing 
agencies involved in United States maritime policy, including MARAD, to 
develop and implement policies that would, among other objectives, 
invest in United States shipbuilding. In support of that E.O. and MARAD 
general authority at 46 U.S.C. 50101(a), MARAD has added a fourth 
selection priority under Sec.  294.15(b) for vessels built in the 
United States. MARAD believes that this revised prioritization will 
balance the applicable equities, ensuring that the program (1) has a 
sufficient U.S.-based nexus while also giving both applicants and the 
Federal Government the greatest latitude to select the most capable 
vessels for the program and (2) supporting E.O. 14269's focus on United 
States shipbuilding activities.
    One commenter asked MARAD to clarify if TSP vessels are considered 
public vessels of the United States. The comment raises an issue that 
is dependent on facts and circumstances in an analysis under the Public 
Vessels Act rather than the Tanker Security Act and thus is beyond the 
scope of this rulemaking.

Regulatory Analyses and Notices

Executive Order 12866

    This rule has been determined to be not significant pursuant to 
E.O. 12866 and was not reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB). TSP statutory authorities currently authorize the establishment 
of a fleet of product tank vessels, engaged in U.S. foreign commerce 
and available for use by DOW during times of war or national emergency. 
Statutory language defines, among other elements: the maximum size of 
the TSP Fleet at 20 vessels; the general vessel selection criteria; the 
obligations and rights of program participants; the maximum annual 
payments per vessel under each agreement and the conditions of such 
payments; and each participant's national security obligations under 
the program.

Benefits

    The major benefits of TSP are that it will: (1) provide DOW with 
assured access to U.S.-flagged product tank vessels that may be used to 
supply the armed forces of the United States with fuel during times of 
war or national emergency, and (2) help to ensure that a core fleet of 
U.S.-based product tankers can operate competitively in international 
trade and enhance U.S. supply chain resiliency for liquid fuel 
products. The DOW's Fuel Tanker Study found an insufficient supply of 
U.S.-flagged tankers to meet National Defense Strategy requirements. In 
addition, TSP will help maintain a U.S.-flag presence in international 
commerce. The TSP vessels will be a critical component of U.S.-flag 
capability that contributes to the U.S. mariner base for utilization on 
both the commercial, Ready Reserve Force, and DOW fleets.

Costs

    Congress set statutory limits on the maximum number of participant 
vessels and the annual payment per vessel. TSP statutory authorities 
allow the participation of up to 20 vessels in TSP through the end of 
FY 2040. MARAD is authorized to pay each operator of a TSP vessel an 
annual stipend per vessel ranging from $8,160,000 for fiscal years 2025 
and 2026 to $9,833,000 for fiscal years 2039 and 2040, subject to the 
availability of appropriations and specific operating requirements. 
Program funding is authorized at $122,400,000 per year for fiscal years 
2025 and 2026, with gradual increases in funding authorization to 
$196,660,000 per year for fiscal years 2039 and 2040. Application costs 
for vessels that apply for the TSP are discussed in the section below, 
describing MARAD's compliance with the Paperwork Reduction Act for this 
rule.

Analysis of Alternatives

    Section 3511 of the FY21 NDAA provides for the TSP with new funding 
authorization and establishes a dedicated product tanker fleet program 
distinct from the existing Maritime Security Program (MSP) fleet. 
Congress also prescribed the minimum requirements of the TSP, including 
ship ownership, vessel eligibility, vessel documentation, program 
duration, the number of participating vessels, the amount of funding, 
and national security obligations. The Act provides detailed 
requirements for establishing and operating the TSP, and MARAD does not 
have discretion to deviate from those requirements in the regulations 
that establish the TSP's operation.
    Since publishing the IFR, this final rule now includes a 
prioritization for commercial tankers built in the United States. In 
support of this new addition, MARAD points to its longstanding 
objectives and policies that ensure the U.S. Merchant Marine is 
composed of the best equipped, safest, and most suitable types of 
vessels constructed in the United States and manned with a trained and 
efficient citizen personnel.\4\ At this time, there are no US-built 
tanker vessels, but this new priority could prompt the building of 
tanker vessels in the United States without foreclosing foreign built 
tanker program participation. In addition, MARAD has made updates to 
the duration of its operating agreements and the payment

[[Page 37325]]

schedules that were set by Congress in section 3531 of NDAA FY25, 
clarifications on when TSP vessels are on charter to the Government, 
and improvements to the marine casualty provision designed to benefit 
operating agreement holders by providing them with greater clarity and 
flexibility of business operations in the event their vessels are 
activated under VTA, which can be highly disruptive to standard 
commercial activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ 46 U.S.C. 50101(a)(4).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Executive Order 14192

    E.O. 14192 requires that for ``each new [E.O. 14192 regulatory 
action] issued, at least ten prior regulations be identified for 
elimination.'' Implementation guidance for E.O. 14192, issued by OMB 
(Memorandum M-25-20, March 26, 2025), defines an E.O. 14192 
deregulatory action as ``an action that has been finalized and has 
total costs less than zero.'' This rule is required by law and is 
excepted from E.O. 14192 as not meeting the definition of a regulation 
or rule because it is being issued ``with respect to a military, 
national security, . . . related function of the United States.'' 
(Section 5(a) of E.O. 14192).

Regulatory Flexibility Act

    Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 601, et seq., rules 
that are exempt from notice and comment under the Administrative 
Procedure Act (APA) or any other law are also exempt from the RFA 
analytical requirements, including conducting a regulatory flexibility 
analysis. See 5 U.S.C. 603(a) and 604(a).
    On December 7, 2022, MARAD published its Tanker Security Program 
regulations (87 FR 74977) as an IFR without notice and the opportunity 
for public comment and delayed the effective date ordinarily prescribed 
by the APA. As discussed in the IFR, MARAD concluded that the rule 
involved a military function of the United States under 5 U.S.C. 
553(a)(1) and was therefore exempt from the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 
553. Nonetheless, MARAD also analyzed the rule under 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B) 
and determined that it had good cause to waive prior opportunity for 
notice and comment. For similar reasons, MARAD determined that it had 
good cause to waive the 30-day delay in effective date under 5 U.S.C. 
553. Following publication of the IFR, MARAD received comments and has 
addressed those comments above under the heading Comments on the 
Interim Final Rule. Because this rule is exempt from the APA notice and 
comment requirements, MARAD is not required to conduct a regulatory 
flexibility analysis.

Executive Order 13132

    MARAD analyzed this rulemaking in accordance with the principles 
and criteria contained in E.O. 13132, Federalism, and has determined 
that it does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the 
preparation of a federalism summary impact statement. This rulemaking 
has no substantial effect on the States, or on the current Federal-
State relationship, or on the current distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various local officials. Nothing in this 
document preempts any State law or regulation. Therefore, MARAD did not 
consult with State and local officials.

The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act

    The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 requires Agencies to 
evaluate whether an Agency action would result in the expenditure by 
State, local, and tribal governments, in the aggregate, or by the 
private sector, of $212 million or more (as adjusted for inflation in 
$2026) in any one year, and if so, to take steps to minimize these 
unfunded mandates. This rulemaking will not impose unfunded mandates 
under the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995. It will not result in 
costs of $212 million or more to either State, local, or tribal 
governments, in the aggregate, or to the private sector, and is the 
least burdensome alternative that achieves the objectives of the rule.

National Environmental Policy Act

    Pursuant to 49 CFR 1.81, the Secretary has delegated the 
``functions'' under NEPA to the Administrators ``as they relate to the 
matters within the primary responsibility of each Operating 
Administration.'' MARAD has determined that this final rule is 
categorically excluded pursuant to DOT Order 5610.1D, subpart C, 
section (e)(3). A categorical exclusion (CE) is an action identified in 
an agency's NEPA procedures that does not normally have a significant 
impact on the environment and therefore does not require either an 
environmental assessment (EA) or environmental impact statement (EIS). 
See DOT Order 5610.1D, section 9. In analyzing the applicability of a 
CE, the agency must also consider whether extraordinary circumstances 
are present that would warrant the preparation of an EA or EIS. Id. at 
section 9(b). MARAD may utilize its own CEs, in addition to CEs listed 
in DOT Order 5610.1D Appendix A or another Operating Administration's 
CEs, using the procedures described in DOT Order 5610.1D, section 9, 
and subpart C, section (e). This promulgation of a final rule to 
establish the TSP is categorically excluded pursuant to DOT Order 
5610.1D, subpart C, section (e)(3): ``Internal orders and procedures 
not required to be published in the Federal Register, promulgation of 
rules, regulations, directives, and amendments thereto which do not 
require a regulatory impact analysis under section 3 or do not have a 
potential to cause a significant impact on the environment . . .'' 
MARAD does not anticipate any environmental impacts, and there are no 
extraordinary circumstances present in connection with this rulemaking.

Privacy Impact Assessment

    Section 522(a)(5) of the Transportation, Treasury, Independent 
Agencies, and General Government Appropriations Act, 2005 (Pub. L. 108-
447, div. H, 118 Stat. 2809 at 3268) requires DOT and certain other 
Federal agencies to conduct a privacy impact assessment of each 
proposed rule that will affect the privacy of individuals. This 
rulemaking does not result in personally identifiable information (PII) 
being collected or maintained in a Government-run website or IT system. 
Therefore, MARAD did not conduct a Privacy Impact Assessment.

Regulation Identifier Number (RIN)

    A regulation identifier number (RIN) is assigned to each regulatory 
action listed in the Unified Agenda of Federal Regulations. The 
Regulatory Information Service Center publishes the Unified Agenda 
twice each year. The RIN number contained in the heading of this 
document can be used to cross-reference this action with the Unified 
Agenda.

Paperwork Reduction Act

    Under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), a person is not 
required to respond to a collection of information by a Federal agency 
unless the collection displays a valid Office of OMB control number. 
This OMB approved collection of information is identified under OMB 
Control Number 2133-0554. The collection is necessary to accept 
applications, undertake the review of applicant qualifications to 
ensure applications are complete, monitor participation and vessel 
availability, and administer and maintain all aspects of the TSP 
program. The annual burden estimate is $2,438.50.

Privacy Act

    Anyone can search the electronic form of all comments received into 
any of our dockets by the name of the

[[Page 37326]]

individual submitting the comment (or signing the comment, if submitted 
on behalf of an association, business, labor union, etc.). For 
information on DOT's compliance with the Privacy Act, please visit 
 https://www.transportation.gov/privacy .

List of Subjects 46 CFR Part 294

    Maritime carriers, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

    For the reasons stated in the preamble, the Maritime Administration 
adopts the interim rule adding 46 CFR part 294, which was published at 
87 FR 74977 on December 7, 2022, as final with the following changes:

0
1. Part 294 is revised to read as follows:

PART 294--TANKER SECURITY PROGRAM (TSP)

Subpart A--Introduction
Sec.
294.1 Purpose.
294.3 Definitions.
294.5 Applications.
294.7 Procedural waivers.
Subpart B--Establishment of a Tanker Security Fleet
294.9 Product tanker vessel eligibility.
294.11 Owner, charterer, and operator citizenship eligibility 
requirements.
294.13 Special rule for TSP Fleet Vessel entry age.
Subpart C--Award of TSP Operating Agreements
294.15 Initial award of TSP Operating Agreements.
294.17 Subsequent award of TSP Operating Agreements.
294.19 Nature of award procedure.
Subpart D--TSP Operating Agreements
294.21 General conditions.
294.23 Special terms.
294.25 National security modifications.
294.27 Financial reporting.
Subpart E--Billing and Payment
294.29 Billing procedures.
294.31 Payments.
Subpart F--Appeals Procedures
294.33 Administrative determinations.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. ch. 534, 49 CFR 1.93.

Subpart A--Introduction

Sec.  294.1  Purpose.

    This part prescribes regulations implementing subtitle B of Title 
XXXV of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 
(Pub. L. 116-283), section 3511, and the National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Pub. L. 117-81), section 3515, codified at 
ch. 534 of title 46, United States Code, governing the establishment of 
a Tanker Security Fleet of product tank vessels operating in the 
foreign trade or mixed foreign and domestic commerce of the United 
States permitted under a registry endorsement issued by the United 
States Coast Guard. The Department of War (DOW) and the U.S. Department 
of Transportation (DOT) have joint responsibility for the Tanker 
Security Fleet, with responsibility delegated to the Commander, United 
States Transportation Command through the Secretary of War, and the 
Maritime Administrator through the Secretary of Transportation.

Sec.  294.3  Definitions.

    For the purposes of this part:
    (a) Administrator means the Administrator, Maritime Administration, 
United States Department of Transportation.
    (b) Agreement Holder means the owner or operator of a TSP Fleet 
Vessel, excluding a trust, that:
    (1) Meets the eligibility requirements of 46 U.S.C. 53402(c)(1), 
(2), (3), or (4); and
    (2) Enters into a Tanker Security Program Operating Agreement for 
the TSP Fleet Vessel with the Secretary of Transportation pursuant to 
46 U.S.C. 53403.
    (c) Applicant means a person applying for a Tanker Security Program 
Operating Agreement, excluding trusts.
    (d) Classification society means the American Bureau of Shipping, 
or another classification society accepted by the Commandant of the 
United States Coast Guard.
    (e) CAP means Conditional Assessment Program, a voluntary program 
offered by classification societies intended to measure and document 
the actual technical and functional condition of tankers 15 years of 
age or more.
    (f) Coastwise trade means waterborne trade between points in the 
United States as defined in 46 U.S.C. ch. 551.
    (g) Commandant means the Commandant of the United States Coast 
Guard.
    (h) Commander means Commander, USTRANSCOM.
    (i) CR means continuing resolution.
    (j) Defense Contractor means a person that operates or manages 
United States-documented vessels for the Secretary of War, or charters 
vessels to the Secretary of War, and has entered into a special 
security agreement with the Secretary of War.
    (k) Documentation Citizen means a person able to document a vessel 
under 46 U.S.C. ch. 121. This paragraph (k) includes a United States 
Citizen Trust.
    (l) DOW means the United States Department of War.
    (m) Emergency Preparedness Agreement means a voluntary agreement 
established by the Maritime Administration (MARAD) under section 708 of 
the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. 4558).
    (n) Fiscal Year means an annual period beginning on October 1 and 
ending on September 30.
    (o) Fleet means all Tanker Security Program (TSP) Fleet Vessels at 
any given time.
    (p) Foreign commerce means commerce or trade between the United 
States, its territories or possessions, or the District of Columbia, 
and a foreign country; and commerce or trade between foreign countries.
    (q) Noncontiguous domestic trade means the waterborne 
transportation of cargo between a point in the contiguous 48 States and 
a point in Alaska, Hawaii, or Puerto Rico, other than a point in Alaska 
north of the Arctic Circle.
    (r) Person includes corporations, partnerships, and associations 
existing under, or authorized by, laws of the United States, or any 
State, territory, district, or possession thereof, or any foreign 
country.
    (s) Product tank vessel means a double-hulled tank vessel capable 
of carrying simultaneously more than 2 separated grades of refined 
petroleum products.
    (t) Secretary means the Secretary of Transportation unless the 
context indicates otherwise.
    (u) Section 50501 citizen means a person meeting the statutory 
qualifications for United States citizenship designation under 46 
U.S.C. 50501.
    (v) TSP Fleet Vessel means any product tank vessel operating under 
a Tanker Security Program Operating Agreement on or after January 1, 
2022, that--
    (1) Meets the requirements of 46 U.S.C. 53402(b); and
    (2) Is no more than 20 years of age.
    (w) Tanker Security Program Operating Agreement or TSP Operating 
Agreement means the assistance agreement between an Agreement Holder 
and MARAD that provides for payments under this part but is not a 
procurement contract.
    (x) United States Citizen Trust means:
    (1) Subject to paragraph (x)(3) of this section, a trust that is 
qualified under this paragraph (x).
    (2) A trust is qualified only if:
    (i) Each of the trustees is a section 50501 citizen; and
    (ii) The application for documentation of the vessel under 46 
U.S.C. ch. 121, includes the affidavit of each trustee stating that the 
trustee is not aware of

[[Page 37327]]

any reason involving a beneficiary of the trust that is not a section 
50501 citizen, or involving any other person that is not a section 
50501 citizen, as a result of which the beneficiary or other person 
would hold more than 25 percent of the aggregate power to influence or 
limit the exercise of the authority of the trustee with respect to 
matters involving any ownership or operation of the vessel that may 
adversely affect the interests of the United States.
    (3) If any person that is not a section 50501 citizen has authority 
to direct or participate in directing a trustee for a trust in matters 
involving any ownership or operation of the vessel that may adversely 
affect the interests of the United States or in removing a trustee for 
a trust without cause, either directly or indirectly through the 
control of another person, the trust instrument provides that persons 
who are not section 50501 citizens may not hold more than 25 percent of 
the aggregate authority to so direct or remove a trustee.
    (4) This paragraph (x) will not be considered to prohibit a person 
who is not a section 50501 citizen from holding more than 25 percent of 
the beneficial interest in a trust.
    (y) USTRANSCOM means United States Transportation Command.
    (z) Vessel of the United States means a merchant vessel that has 
been documented under 46 U.S.C. ch. 121.

Sec.  294.5  Applications.

    (a) Applicants. Each applicant for a TSP Operating Agreement is 
required to apply to the Tanker Security Program, Maritime 
Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, 1200 New Jersey 
Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590. Electronic submissions must be 
submitted to   [email&#160;protected]  . Application forms are available 
upon request or may be downloaded from MARAD's website. Required 
information includes:
    (1) An Affidavit of section 50501 citizenship that comports with 
the requirements of 46 CFR part 355, if applying as a section 50501 
citizen. Otherwise, an affidavit which demonstrates that the Applicant 
is qualified to document a vessel under 46 U.S.C. ch. 121 is required. 
If the Applicant is a vessel operator and proposes to employ a vessel 
manager, then the Applicant must supply an affidavit for the vessel 
manager that meets the same citizenship requirements as the Applicant.
    (2) Corporate documents, to include the following:
    (i) Certificate of Incorporation or other organization papers, 
including amendments presently in effect;
    (ii) Corporate by-laws or other governing instruments, including 
amendments presently in effect;
    (iii) Form or type of organization, i.e., individual, partnership, 
corporation, or other organization;
    (iv) Federal, State, or other laws under which the Applicant is 
organized or incorporated, and the date of organization or 
incorporation;
    (v) Address of principal offices, and of important branch offices, 
if any;
    (vi) Description of domestic and international and corporate 
affiliations, including (but not limited to) parent companies, 
subsidiary companies, and other related companies within its corporate 
structure, along with a description of the nature of the business 
transacted with each affiliated corporation;
    (vii) Concerning each officer and director of the Applicant, 
provide name, address, nationality, number of shares owned and specify 
type of shares whether voting or non-voting;
    (viii) For each individual or entity that owns five percent or more 
of the outstanding capital shares of any class of stock of the 
Applicant, include the name, address, nationality, and number of 
capital shares owned and specify type of shares whether voting or non-
voting; and
    (ix) A brief statement of the general effect of each voting 
agreement, voting trust, or other arrangement whereby the voting rights 
of five percent or more of the outstanding shares of the Applicant are 
owned, controlled, or exercised by any person not the holder of legal 
title to such shares. Give the name, address, nationality, and business 
of any such person, and if not an individual, the form of organization.
    (3) Financial data, to include the following:
    (i) An audited financial statement or a completed MARAD Form MA-172 
dated within 120 days after the close of the most recent fiscal period; 
and
    (ii) Estimated annual forecast of maritime operations for the next 
five years showing revenue and expense, including explanations of any 
significant increase or decrease of these items.
    (4) Maritime related affiliations including carriers or alliances 
with which the Applicant maintains an ongoing relationship.
    (5) Ongoing business relationships with any refineries, terminals, 
distributors, or other entities engaged in refined petroleum production 
and distribution, whether in the United States or in a foreign state, 
both at the time of application and, if applicable, projected to be 
established within the five years following the date of application.
    (6) Diversity of trading patterns. List of countries and trade 
routes serviced or trades in which the product tank vessel is to be 
operated, whether the vessel is to be operated on a voyage charter, or 
time charter, and any specific tanker pools the vessel is associated 
with.
    (7) Applicant's record of owning or operating product tank vessels, 
include the following:
    (i) Provide the number, type, and size of product tank vessels 
owned or operated in the last ten years, specifying whether owned or 
operated, flag(s) of the individual vessels, trades involved, number of 
employees in your ship operations department, including the number of 
employees directly employed in U.S.-flag operations;
    (ii) Operating experience with product tank vessels in 
international trade;
    (iii) Demonstration of reliability and breadth of services and 
experience;
    (iv) Experience in delivering services in accordance with 
government contracts or in relation to the carriage of DOW or other 
government sponsored cargoes;
    (v) Vessels owned by the applicant and chartered by other persons;
    (vi) Vessels chartered by the applicant from other persons--provide 
vessel name, flag of registry, period of charter, name of charterer or 
owner (as applicable) and area of operation;
    (vii) Vessel or ship managers utilized in the operation of your 
vessels; and
    (viii) Any other information you believe to be relevant to your 
record of owning or operating vessels.
    (8) Product tank vessel details and operational standards:
    (i) Vessel must be a party to the Oil Companies International 
Marine Forum's Ship Inspection Report (SIRE) System and applicant must 
provide date of last SIRE report.
    (ii) Applicant must confirm acceptances received and/or retained by 
the vessel since the last SIRE report.
    (iii) Applicant must confirm that the vessel has not been rejected 
or refused by any Charterer since the inspections leading to the said 
SIRE report.
    (iv) Applicant must provide a current Intertanko Standard Tanker 
Chartering Questionnaire 88 (Q-88) (no more than 60 days old).
    (v) Applicant must confirm vessel has vetting approval from at 
least two oil majors providing date of vetting and name of oil major, 
at least one vetting approval must be less than six months old at time 
of application.

[[Page 37328]]

    (vi) Applicant must provide a copy of vessel's current Class 
Society issued Safety Management Certificate.
    (vii) Applicant must provide a copy of vessel's current Flag State 
issued International Ship Security Certificate.
    (viii) Applicant must confirm vessel's ability to carry one 
complete un-decanted tank washing in dedicated slop tanks.
    (ix) Applicant must submit a General Arrangement Plan, trim and 
stability booklet, and a set of the ship's capacity and stowage plans. 
This is to include cargo piping. Applicants are to provide narrative 
descriptions to accompany the drawings indicating proposed locations of 
all required spaces and compartments listed in the military 
requirements.
    (x) Applicant must provide evidence of the vessel's most recent 
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) (or other 
classification society accepted by the Commandant of the Coast Guard), 
inspections conducted within 12 months of the application.
    (xi) Applicant must warrant vessel meets, or will meet, before the 
start of a TSP Operating Agreement, the requirements of a Quality 
Management System (QMS). If an applicant does not currently have the 
required systems in place it will provide a narrative describing how it 
will have these required systems in place.
    (9) Provide an assessment of the utility of the product tank 
vessel(s) to DOW fuel transportation requirements including any 
specific national defense sealift features. Provide characteristics 
that indicate the utility of the product tank vessel(s) to DOW 
including items of specific value.
    (i) Applicant must provide an assessment of the vessel's ability to 
install CONSOL and the proposed locations for installation. CONSOL 
details may be found on MARAD's Tanker Security Program website at: 
 https://www.maritime.dot.gov/national-security/strategic-sealift/tanker-security-program .
    (ii) Owner must confirm vessel's ability to sustain warranted speed 
of 14 knots, fully laden, in moderate weather (Force 4 on the Beaufort 
Scale).
    (iii) Provide the number and location of available berths for 
additional personnel beyond the ship crew.
    (10) Provide an assessment of the commercial viability of your 
proposed product tank vessel(s).
    (11) Provide any charters or management agreements that would 
govern the operation of the vessel if selected (pro forma copies are 
acceptable), including but not limited to the following:
    (i) Demise or bareboat charter;
    (ii) Vessel management agreement; and
    (iii) Crewing agreement.
    (12) Special security agreements. If applicable, provide a copy of 
any special security agreement.
    (13) Documentation Citizen. If applicable, the Documentation 
Citizen must submit a signed certification as the demise charterer of 
the proposed TSP Fleet Vessel. The certification must provide a 
statement that there are no treaties, statutes, regulations, or other 
laws of the foreign country of the parent that would prohibit the 
proposed Agreement Holder from performing its obligations under a TSP 
Operating Agreement.
    (14) If operating under a foreign parent, the ultimate foreign 
parent of the Documentation Citizen demise charterer must submit a 
signed certification. The certification must provide a statement that 
the foreign parent will not influence the operation of the TSP Fleet 
Vessel in a manner that will adversely affect the interests of the 
United States.
    (15) For a United States Citizen Trust agreement, if the Applicant 
intends to place the vessel in a United States Citizen Trust during its 
operation in the fleet, provide a copy of any such trust agreement (pro 
forma copies are acceptable).
    (16) If applicable, provide a replacement product tank vessel plan 
if your product tank vessel is a TSP Fleet Vessel over 10 years of age. 
The replacement product tank vessel plan must include:
    (i) The vessel's characteristics as applicable in paragraphs (a)(8) 
and (9) of this section;
    (ii) A letter of intent or other document indicating agreement for 
purchase of product tank vessel; and
    (iii) A forecast of operations for five years for the replacement 
product tank vessel.
    (17) Special rule regarding age of participating TSP Fleet Vessel. 
Age restrictions will not apply during the first 30-month period 
beginning on the date the vessel begins operating under the TSP 
Operating Agreement if the Secretary determines that the participant 
has entered an arrangement to obtain a replacement vessel that will be 
eligible to be included in a TSP Operating Agreement.
    (18) Provide an anti-lobbying certificate as required by 49 CFR 
part 20 stating that no funds provided under the TSP have been used for 
lobbying to obtain a TSP Operating Agreement.
    (b) Procedures for applications--(1) Address. Owners or operators 
of an eligible vessel may apply to MARAD for inclusion of that vessel 
in the fleet. Applications may be submitted electronically to 
  [email&#160;protected]   or in hard copy to the Tanker Security Program, 
Maritime Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, 1200 New 
Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590.
    (2) Time deadlines. Within 90 days after the close of the 
application period, the Secretary will approve an application, in 
conjunction with the Secretary of War, or provide in writing the reason 
for denial of that application.
    (3) Existing MSP Fleet Vessels. The Secretary may approve a 
completed application from an Applicant that, on the date of its 
application, is operating a product tank vessel in the MSP Fleet in 
accordance with 46 U.S.C. ch. 531 and 46 CFR part 296.

Sec.  294.7  Procedural waivers.

    In consultation with DOW, MARAD may, at MARAD's own initiation or 
in response to a request by an interested party, after a finding of 
good cause, suspend, revoke, amend, or waive any requirement of the 
regulations in this part, subject to the provisions of the 
Administrative Procedure Act and any statutory limitations.

Subpart B--Establishment of a Tanker Security Fleet

Sec.  294.9  Product tanker vessel eligibility requirements.

    (a) Eligibility. To be eligible to be included in the fleet, the 
vessel must:
    (1) Meet the requirements of Sec.  294.11;
    (2) Operate (or in the case of a vessel to be constructed, will be 
operated) in providing transportation in United States foreign 
commerce;
    (3) Be self-propelled;
    (4) Be not more than 10 years of age on the date the vessel is 
first included in the TSP Fleet;
    (5) Be suitable for use by the United States for national defense 
or military purposes in time of war or national emergency, as 
determined by the Secretary of War;
    (6) Be commercially viable, as determined by the Secretary of 
Transportation; and
    (7) Be--
    (i) A vessel of the United States; or
    (ii) Not a vessel of the United States, but the owner of the vessel 
has demonstrated that--
    (A) The vessel is eligible for a USCG certificate of inspection; 
and
    (B) The vessel owner intends to have the vessel documented under 46 
U.S.C. ch. 121 at the time the vessel is to be included in the TSP 
Fleet.
    (b) Telecommunications and other electronic equipment. The

[[Page 37329]]

telecommunications and other electronic equipment on an existing vessel 
that is redocumented under the laws of the United States for operation 
under a TSP Operating Agreement will satisfy all Federal Communications 
Commission equipment certification requirements if:
    (1) The equipment complies with all applicable international 
agreements and associated guidelines as determined by the country in 
which the vessel was documented immediately before becoming documented 
under the laws of the United States;
    (2) The country has not been identified by the Secretary as 
inadequately enforcing international regulations as to that vessel; and
    (3) The equipment, at the end of its useful life, will be replaced 
with equipment that meets Federal Communications Commission equipment 
certification standards.

Sec.  294.11  Owner, charterer, and operator citizenship eligibility 
requirements.

    For a vessel to be eligible to be included in the TSP Fleet, vessel 
owners, charterers, and operators must evidence that, during the period 
of a TSP Operating Agreement, one of the following must be true:
    (a) The vessel is owned and operated by one or more persons that 
are citizens of the United States in accordance with 46 U.S.C. 50501.
    (b) The vessel is owned by a citizen of the United States in 
accordance with 46 U.S.C. 50501, or United States Citizen Trust, and 
the following conditions are met:
    (1) The vessel is demise chartered to a person or entity that:
    (i) Is eligible to document the vessel under 46 U.S.C. ch. 121;
    (ii) Is organized such that the chairman of the board of directors, 
chief executive officer, and most of the members of the board of 
directors are citizens of the United States, and are appointed and 
subjected to removal only upon approval by the Secretary;
    (iii) Certifies to the Secretary that there are no treaties, 
statutes, regulations, or other laws that would prohibit the program 
participant for the vessel from performing its obligations under a TSP 
Operating Agreement; and
    (iv) In the case of a vessel that is demise chartered to an entity 
that is owned or controlled by another person or entity that is not a 
citizen of the United States under 46 U.S.C. 50501, that other person 
or entity certifies to the Secretary that there are no treaties, 
statutes, regulations, or other laws that would prohibit the person or 
entity from performing its obligations under a TSP Operating Agreement 
and enters into an agreement with the Secretary not to influence the 
vessel's operation in any way that would be detrimental to the United 
States.
    (2) The Secretary and the Secretary of War notify the Committee on 
Armed Services and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Armed Services and 
the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives that the Secretaries concur with the certifications by 
the documentation citizen required under Sec.  294.5(a)(13), and any 
ultimate foreign parent corporation under Sec.  294.5(a)(14), and after 
a review, agree that there are no legal, operational, or other 
impediments that would prohibit the owner or operator of the vessel 
from performing its obligations under a TSP Operating Agreement.
    (c) The vessel is owned and operated by a defense contractor, 
including affiliated or related companies within the same corporate 
group, that meets the following requirements:
    (1) Eligible to document the vessel under 46 U.S.C. ch. 121;
    (2) Operates or manages other United States-documented vessels for 
the Secretary of War, or charters other vessels to the Secretary of 
War;
    (3) Enters into a special security agreement with the Secretary of 
War;
    (4) Certifies to the Secretary, at the time of application and 
consistent with Sec.  294.5(a)(13), that there are no treaties, 
statutes, regulations, or other laws that would prohibit the Agreement 
Holder from performing its obligations under a TSP Operating Agreement; 
and
    (5) Any foreign corporate parent company of the Defense Contractor 
proffers, at the time of application for a TSP Operating Agreement, an 
agreement consistent with Sec.  294.5(a)(14), not to influence the 
vessel's operation in a way that is detrimental to the United States.
    (d) The vessel is owned by a Documentation Citizen in accordance 
with 46 U.S.C. ch. 121 and demise chartered to a Citizen of the United 
States in accordance with 46 U.S.C. 50501.

Sec.  294.13  Special rule for TSP Fleet Vessel entry age.

    An Applicant may apply for a TSP Operating Agreement with a vessel 
that exceeds the maximum entry age requirement of Sec.  294.9(a)(4), if 
it satisfies the following conditions:
    (a) The Applicant demonstrates their intent to replace the non-
compliant vessel within 30 months after the commencement of operations 
under a TSP Operating Agreement;
    (b) Nominated vessels 15 years or older must be enrolled in a 
classification society's CAP and be rated equivalent to ABS CAP 2 or 
better; and
    (c) The Secretary determines that the Applicant has entered into an 
agreement to obtain and operate a replacement product tank vessel 
which, upon commencing operation under the same TSP Operating Agreement 
for the non-compliant vessel, will be eligible to be included in the 
fleet under Sec.  294.9.

Subpart C--Award of TSP Operating Agreements

Sec.  294.15  Initial award of TSP Operating Agreements.

    (a) Number of agreements. The Secretary, in concurrence with the 
Secretary of War, may award up to ten TSP Operating Agreements for the 
operation of product tank vessels from among those applications 
submitted by qualified Applicants. If the Secretary and the Secretary 
of War are unable to select ten vessels for inclusion in the TSP Fleet 
from their initial review of applications, they may accept additional 
applications for review to ensure that the Secretary can award ten TSP 
Operating Agreements.
    (b) Vessel selection priority. In consideration of the 
applications, the Secretary and the Secretary of War will consider each 
Applicant's vessel(s)'s qualifications as they relate to subpart B of 
this part and will give priority to applications based on the criteria 
in paragraphs (b)(1) through (4) of this section, in order of priority:
    (1) Vessel capabilities, as established by the Secretary of War;
    (2) Applicant's record of vessel ownership and operation of tanker 
vessels;
    (3) Applicant's citizenship, with preference for section 50501 
citizens; and
    (4) Location of vessel construction, with preference for vessels 
built in the United States.
    (c) Consideration of applications requesting an age waiver. If an 
Applicant applies for a TSP Operating Agreement under the provisions of 
this section, the Secretary and the Secretary of War will consider:
    (1) Whether the vessel is enrolled in its class society's CAP and 
has maintained a rating equivalent to ABS CAP 2 or better;
    (2) The vessel priority factors in paragraph (b) of this section 
for both the proposed non-compliant vessel and the vessel proposed to 
replace the non-compliant vessel within the initial 30

[[Page 37330]]

months of the TSP Operating Agreement; and
    (3) The feasibility of the Applicant's plan to obtain and operate 
the compliant replacement vessel within the initial 30 months of the 
TSP Operating Agreement.
    (d) Notification to Applicants. After the Secretary, in concurrence 
with the Secretary of War, has selected those vessels to be included in 
the TSP Fleet, the Secretary will notify all Applicants as to whether 
their applications were successful or unsuccessful.
    (1) For each successful application, the Secretary will extend an 
offer to the Applicant to enter into one or more TSP Operating 
Agreements, based on the number of vessels selected from the 
Applicant's application for inclusion into the TSP Fleet.
    (2) For each unsuccessful application, the Secretary will inform 
the Applicant of the reason(s) why the application was unsuccessful.

Sec.  294.17  Subsequent award of TSP Operating Agreements.

    (a) Availability. When a TSP Operating Agreement becomes available 
through termination by the Secretary or early termination by an 
Agreement Holder, or if Congress expands the maximum authorized fleet 
size by statute, and no transfer under 46 U.S.C. 53405(e) is involved, 
MARAD will accept applications for a new TSP Operating Agreement 
pursuant to paragraphs (a)(1) through (3) of this section:
    (1) The proposed vessel must meet the requirements of Sec.  294.9;
    (2) The Applicant must meet the requirements of Sec.  294.11; and
    (3) The Applicant must apply in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec.  294.5.
    (b) Consideration of applications. The Secretary and the Secretary 
of War will consider all applications within the priority structure of 
Sec.  294.15(b).
    (c) Notification and award of a new TSP Operating Agreement. Upon 
selection of the best-qualified vessel(s) from among the applications 
received, MARAD will enter into a new TSP Operating Agreement with the 
successful Applicant as soon as is practicable. Successful Applicants 
must notify the Secretary of their acceptance of an offer to enter into 
a TSP Operating Agreement within 90 days.

Sec.  294.19  Nature of award procedure.

    TSP furthers a public purpose and MARAD does not acquire goods or 
services through TSP. Therefore, the selection process for awarding TSP 
Operating Agreements does not constitute an acquisition subject to 
procurement law or the Federal Acquisition Regulation in title 48 of 
the Code of Federal Regulations.

Subpart D--TSP Operating Agreements

Sec.  294.21  General conditions.

    (a) Number of agreements. The Secretary may enter into up to ten 
TSP Operating Agreements for vessels that were either selected in 
accordance with Sec.  294.15 or which, on the effective date of a TSP 
Operating Agreement, were operating under an MSP Operating Agreement in 
accordance with 46 U.S.C. ch. 531 and 46 CFR part 296, for fiscal year 
2022 and any prior fiscal year. The Secretary may enter into as many 
additional agreements as is authorized under 46 U.S.C. 53403(c) under 
the same terms as the initial ten agreements.
    (b) Term of agreements. TSP Operating Agreements are authorized for 
19 years, starting on October 1, 2021, and ending on September 30, 
2040, but payments to Agreement Holders are subject to annual 
appropriations each fiscal year. MARAD may enter into TSP Operating 
Agreements for a period less than the full term authorized under 46 
U.S.C. ch. 534.
    (c) Replacement vessels. An Agreement Holder may replace a vessel 
under a TSP Operating Agreement with another vessel that is eligible to 
be included in the fleet under Sec.  294.9, if the Secretary, in 
conjunction with the Secretary of War, approves the replacement vessel.
    (d) Termination by the Secretary. Except as provided in Sec.  
294.23(d)(3), if an Agreement Holder fails to comply with the terms of 
a TSP Operating Agreement:
    (1) The Secretary will notify the Agreement Holder and provide a 
reasonable opportunity for the Agreement Holder to comply with the 
terms and conditions of the TSP Operating Agreement; and
    (2) The Secretary will terminate the TSP Operating Agreement if the 
Agreement Holder fails to achieve such compliance.
    (e) Eligibility of Vessel on long-term charter to the Government. 
Except as provided in Sec.  294.23(d)(2), a TSP Fleet Vessel that is 
time chartered to the United States Government for a period that, 
together with options for extension, occurs for more than 180 
continuous calendar days is ineligible to participate in the TSP Fleet 
as of the date and time the vessel is delivered to, and accepted by, 
the Government under the terms of the time charter. The Secretary may 
terminate the relevant Operating Agreement at that time unless the 
Operating Agreement holder has offered a qualified replacement vessel 
in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (f) Early termination by an Agreement Holder. The Agreement Holder 
must notify the Secretary no later than 60 days before the proposed 
effective termination date that the Agreement Holder intends to 
terminate the TSP Operating Agreement. Even after early termination of 
the Operating Agreement, the Agreement Holder will remain bound by the 
provisions related to vessel documentation and national security 
requirements, including any commitments under an Emergency Preparedness 
Agreement, for the full term of the TSP Operating Agreement.
    (g) Nonrenewal for lack of funds. If, by the first day of a fiscal 
year, sufficient funds have not been appropriated under the authority 
of 46 U.S.C. ch. 534 for that fiscal year, the Secretary will notify 
the Senate Committees on Armed Services, Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation, and Appropriations, and the House of Representatives 
Committees on Armed Services and Appropriations, that TSP Operating 
Agreements for which sufficient funds are not available will not be 
renewed for that fiscal year if sufficient funds are not appropriated 
by the 60th day of that fiscal year. (If Congress does not appropriate 
funds at the authorized level by the 60th day of the fiscal year, MARAD 
will pay each vessel its pro rata share of the funds that have been 
appropriated.) If no funds are appropriated by the 60th day of the 
fiscal year, and notwithstanding any other provision, then all TSP 
Operating Agreements will be terminated, and each Agreement Holder will 
be released from its obligations under the TSP Operating Agreement. 
Final payments under the terminated TSP Operating Agreements will be 
made in accordance with Sec.  294.31. To the extent that funds are 
appropriated in a subsequent fiscal year, former TSP Operating 
Agreements may be reinstated if mutually acceptable to the 
Administrator and the Agreement Holder, provided the TSP vessel remains 
eligible to operate under the Operating Agreement.
    (h) Release of vessels from obligations. For Agreement Holders who 
have been released from their obligations under a TSP Operating 
Agreement due to lack of funds in any fiscal year by the 60th day of 
that fiscal year:
    (1) The Agreement Holder may transfer and register each vessel 
covered by a terminated TSP Operating Agreement to a foreign registry 
that is

[[Page 37331]]

acceptable to the Secretary and the Secretary of War, notwithstanding 
46 U.S.C. ch. 561 and 46 CFR part 221;
    (2) If 46 U.S.C. ch. 563 is applicable to a vessel that has been 
transferred to foreign registry due to the termination of a TSP 
Operating Agreement, then that vessel remains available to be 
requisitioned by the Secretary pursuant to 46 U.S.C. ch. 563; and
    (3) The provisions of this section do not apply to vessels under 
TSP Operating Agreements that have been terminated for any other 
reason.
    (i) Transfers of TSP Operating Agreements. An Agreement Holder may 
transfer a TSP Operating Agreement, including all rights and 
obligations under the TSP Operating Agreement, to any person that is 
eligible under Sec.  294.11 to enter into a TSP Operating Agreement, if 
the Secretary and the Secretary of War jointly determine that the 
transfer is in the best interests of the United States. A transaction 
is not considered a transfer of a TSP Operating Agreement if the same 
legal entity with the same vessels remains the Agreement Holder under 
the TSP Operating Agreement.

Sec.  294.23  Special terms.

    (a) TSP Operating Agreement. Each TSP Operating Agreement will 
require that, during the period a TSP Fleet Vessel is operating under 
that TSP Operating Agreement, the TSP Fleet Vessel must:
    (1) Be documented as a vessel of the United States under 46 U.S.C. 
ch. 121;
    (2) Operate exclusively in:
    (i) Foreign commerce;
    (ii) Mixed foreign commerce and domestic trade permitted under a 
registry endorsement issued under 46 U.S.C. 12111, and to those points 
identified in 46 U.S.C. 55101(b);
    (iii) Foreign-to-foreign commerce; or
    (iv) Under charter to the United States, except as provided in 46 
U.S.C. 53404(b); and
    (3) Not otherwise operate in the coastwise trade of the United 
States;
    (4) Not receive payments during a period in which the Agreement 
Holder owns, operates, or charters a vessel engaged in noncontiguous 
domestic trade, unless the Agreement Holder is a section 50501 citizen, 
applying the 75 percent ownership requirements of 46 U.S.C. 50501; and
    (5) Enroll, for vessels 15 years or older, in their classification 
society's CAP and maintain a CAP rating of two or better.
    (b) Operating agreement as an obligation of the United States 
Government. The amounts payable to an Agreement Holder under a TSP 
Operating Agreement constitute a contractual obligation of the United 
States Government to the extent of actual appropriations.
    (c) Operating under a Continuing Resolution. In the event funds are 
available under a Continuing Resolution (CR), the terms and conditions 
of the TSP Operating Agreements will be in force and only for the 
period stipulated in the applicable CR. MARAD will continue to pay 
under each Operating Agreement to the extent of actual appropriations. 
For any Agreement Holder with a TSP Operating Agreement that does not 
receive funds, the terms and conditions of any applicable TSP Operating 
Agreement may be voided, and the Agreement Holder may request 
termination of the TSP Operating Agreement.
    (d) National security. (1) Each TSP Operating Agreement will 
require the Agreement Holder to enter into a Voluntary Tanker Agreement 
(VTA), as approved by the Secretary and the Secretary of War, or other 
agreement approved by the Secretaries.
    (2) No vessel that is operating under a charter from DOW pursuant 
to an activation under VTA or a similar agreement will be subject to 
the requirements of Sec.  294.21(e), as determined by the Maritime 
Administrator.
    (3) The Secretary will not terminate an Operating Agreement with an 
Agreement Holder if the TSP Fleet Vessel covered by the relevant 
Operating Agreement suffers a marine casualty while operating under a 
VTA activation, provided that the Agreement Holder makes all reasonable 
efforts to repair or replace the affected vessel in a timely manner, as 
determined by the Maritime Administrator.
    (e) United States Merchant Marine Academy cadet training. The 
Agreement Holder must agree:
    (1) To carry on the TSP Fleet Vessel two United States Merchant 
Marine Academy cadets, if available, on each voyage; and
    (2) To implement prior to accepting an Operating Agreement 
appropriate policies, programs, and criteria necessary to comply with 
all MARAD cadet safety guidelines that address sexual harassment, 
sexual assault, and other inappropriate conduct.
    (3) Upon a finding of non-compliance, the Administrator may require 
the Agreement Holder to take corrective actions or find such failure to 
constitute a violation of the TSP Operating Agreement.
    (f) Notice of vessel maintenance and repair. The Agreement Holder 
must notify MARAD any time the TSP Fleet Vessel will enter a period of 
maintenance, survey, inspection, or repair such that the TSP Fleet 
Vessel is unable to move under its own power or is unable to meet its 
national security obligations under paragraph (d) of this section if 
immediately called to do so under the terms of VTA.

Sec.  294.25  National security modifications.

    A participant agrees to the installation onboard its TSP Fleet 
Vessel of militarily useful features for national defense purposes as 
approved by U.S. Coast Guard and the vessel's classification society.

Sec.  294.27  Financial reporting.

    The Agreement Holder must submit the following reports to MARAD, 
including management footnotes where necessary to make a fair financial 
presentation:
    (a) Vessel operating cost information. Not later than 120 days 
after the close of the Agreement Holder's semiannual accounting period, 
a Form MA-172 on a semiannual basis, in accordance with 46 CFR 232.6; 
and
    (b) Financial statement. Not later than 120 days after the close of 
the Agreement Holder's annual accounting period, an audited financial 
statement in accordance with 46 CFR 232.6 and the most recent vessel 
operating cost data submitted as part of its Emergency Preparedness 
Agreement, or if not current year data, a Schedule 310 of the MA-172.

Subpart E--Billing and Payment

Sec.  294.29  Billing procedures.

    All Agreement Holders must submit a voucher to MARAD for payment. 
For Agreement Holders operating under more than one TSP Operating 
Agreement, the Agreement Holder may submit a single monthly voucher 
applicable to all its TSP Operating Agreements. Each voucher submission 
must include a certification that the vessel(s) for which payment is 
requested were operated in accordance with Sec.  294.23(a) and 
applicable TSP Operating Agreements. All submissions must be forwarded 
to the Tanker Security Program, MARAD, via email to 
  [email&#160;protected]  . Payments will be paid and processed under the 
terms and conditions of the Prompt Payment Act, 31 U.S.C. 3901, et seq.

Sec.  294.31  Payments.

    (a) Amount payable. A TSP Operating Agreement will provide for each 
TSP Fleet Vessel, an annual payment, subject to the availability of 
appropriations, equal to: $6,000,000 for fiscal years (FY) 2022 to 
2024; $8,160,000 for FY 2025

[[Page 37332]]

and 2026; $8,380,000 for FY 2027 and 2028; $8,606,000 for FY 2029 and 
2030; $8,839,000 for FY 2031 and 2032; $9,078,000 for FY 2033 and 2034; 
$9,323,000 for FY 2035 and 2036; $9,574,000 for FY 2037 and 2038; and 
$9,833,000 for FY 2039 and 2040. This amount will be paid in equal 
monthly installments at the end of each month. The annual amount 
payable, to the extent of actual appropriations, will not be reduced 
except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
    (b) Reductions in amount payable. The annual amount otherwise 
payable under a TSP Operating Agreement will be reduced on a pro rata 
basis:
    (1) For each day less than 320 days in a fiscal year that a TSP 
Fleet Vessel is not operated in accordance with Sec.  294.23(a)(1) 
through (3); or
    (2) If Congress does not appropriate funds at the authorized level 
by the 60th day of the fiscal year.
    (c) No payment. (1) Regardless of whether the Agreement Holder has 
or will operate the TSP Fleet Vessel for 320 days a year, the Agreement 
Holder will not be paid:
    (i) For any day in which the TSP Vessel is engaged in transporting 
more than 7,500 tons of civilian bulk preference cargoes pursuant to 46 
U.S.C. 55302(a), 55305, or 55314 (using the United States standard of 
short tons, which is equivalent to 6,803.85 metric tons or 6,696.75 
long tons);
    (ii) During a period in which the Agreement Holder participates in 
noncontiguous domestic trade, unless that Agreement Holder is a section 
50501 citizen, applying the 75 percent ownership requirement of section 
50501;
    (iii) For any days in which the Agreement Holder operates a TSP 
Vessel that is 15 years or older which is not enrolled in their 
classification society's CAP or is not maintaining a CAP rating of two 
or better;
    (iv) For any day in which the Agreement Holder operates a TSP 
Vessel that is more than 20 years of age;
    (v) For days in excess of 30 days in a fiscal year in which a 
vessel is drydocked or undergoing survey, inspection, or repair, 
unless, prior to the expiration of the vessel's 30-day drydock and 
repair period, the Agreement Holder obtains approval from MARAD for an 
extension beyond 30 days;
    (vi) For any day in which the Agreement Holder does not, at the 
request of the Administrator, carry up to two United States Merchant 
Marine Academy cadets onboard; and
    (vii) If the Agreement Holder does not operate or maintain the TSP 
Fleet Vessel in accordance with the terms of the TSP Operating 
Agreement.
    (2) To the extent that non-payment days under this paragraph (c) 
are known, Agreement Holder payments will be reduced at the time of the 
current billing. The daily reduction amounts will be based on the 
annual amounts in paragraph (a) of this section divided by 365 days 
(366 days in leap years) and rounded to the nearest cent.
    (3) MARAD may require, for good cause, that a portion of the funds 
payable under this section be withheld if the provisions of Sec.  
294.23(a) have not been met.
    (4) Amounts owed to MARAD for reductions applicable to a prior 
billing period must be electronically transferred using MARAD's 
prescribed format, or the amount owed can be credited to MARAD by 
offsetting amounts payable in future billing periods.

Subpart F--Appeals Procedures

Sec.  294.33  Administrative determinations.

    (a) Policy. An Agreement Holder who disagrees with the findings, 
interpretations, or decisions of MARAD with respect to the 
administration of this part or any other dispute or complaint 
concerning the Agreement Holder's TSP Operating Agreement(s) may submit 
an appeal to the Administrator. The appeals must be made in writing to 
the Maritime Administrator, within 60 days following the date of the 
document notifying the Agreement Holder of the administrative 
determination of MARAD. Such an appeal should be addressed to the 
Maritime Administrator, Attn.: TSP Operating Agreement Appeals, 
Maritime Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 
20590 or via email to   [email&#160;protected]  . An appeal is a 
prerequisite to exhausting administrative remedies.
    (b) DOW determinations. Chapter 534 of title 46, United States 
Code, assigns joint and separate roles and responsibilities to the 
Secretary and the Secretary of War. The Administrator and the Commander 
will make joint and separate findings, interpretations, and decisions 
necessary to implement 46 U.S.C. ch. 534. An Agreement Holder who 
disagrees with the initial findings, interpretations, or decisions 
regarding the implementation of 46 U.S.C. ch. 534--whether joint or 
separate in nature--must communicate such disagreement to MARAD. Any 
disagreement or dispute of an Agreement Holder may, where determined 
appropriate by MARAD, be transferred to the Director of Strategic 
Plans, Policy, Logistics, and War-Fighting Development, U.S. 
Transportation Command (Director) for resolution. An Agreement Holder 
who disagrees with the findings, interpretations, or decisions of the 
Director with respect to the administration of this part, may submit an 
appeal to the Commander. Such an appeal must be made in writing to the 
Commander within 60 days following the date of the document notifying 
the Agreement Holder of the administrative determination of the 
Director. Such an appeal should be addressed to the Commander, United 
States Transportation Command, 508 Scott Drive, Scott Air Force Base, 
IL 62225-5357. or via email to 
  [email&#160;protected]  .
    (c) Process. The Administrator, or the Commander in the case of a 
DOW determination, may require the person making the request to furnish 
additional information, or proof of factual allegations, and may order 
a proceeding. The decision of the Administrator, or the Commander in 
the case of a DOW determination, will be administratively final.

(Authority: 46 U.S.C. ch. 534, 49 CFR 1.93)

    By order of the Maritime Administrator.
T. Mitchell Hudson, Jr.,
Secretary, Maritime Administration.
[FR Doc. 2026-12547 Filed 6-22-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4910-81-P