[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 119 (Tuesday, June 23, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 37332-37336]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12578]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Fish and Wildlife Service

50 CFR Part 10

[Docket No. FWS-HQ-LE-2026-0628; FXLE12200900000-267-FF09L00000]
RIN 1018-BJ16

Definition of Shellfish; Inclusion of Cephalopods

AGENCY: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: We, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service), are amending 
the definition of ``shellfish'' in the Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) by removing the phrase ``having a shell'' and adding specific 
taxa. This amendment will clarify that squid, cuttlefish, octopus, and 
other cephalopods are included within the regulatory definition of 
shellfish. This action is deregulatory in nature, as it reduces 
regulatory ambiguity, aligns the

[[Page 37333]]

Service's regulations with current biological understanding and 
commercial practice, reduces regulatory burden and is within the 
Service's purview to amend definitions as needed.

DATES: This rule is effective July 23, 2026.

ADDRESSES: Public comments and materials received, as well as 
supporting documentation used in the preparation of this final 
regulation, are available at  https://www.regulations.gov  at Docket No. 
FWS-HQ-LE-2026-0628.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Douglas R. Ault, Assistant Director, 
Office of Law Enforcement, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, (703) 358-
1949. Individuals in the United States who are deaf, deafblind, hard of 
hearing, or have a speech disability may dial 711 (TTY, TDD, or 
TeleBraille) to access telecommunications relay services. Individuals 
outside the United States should use the relay services offered within 
their country to make international calls to the point-of-contact in 
the United States.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Background

    The regulations in 50 CFR part 10 establish definitions applicable 
throughout title 50 of the Code of Federal Regulations governing 
wildlife and wildlife products under the jurisdiction of the Service. 
Section 10.12 defines ``shellfish'' as ``any species of mollusk having 
a shell,'' a formulation that reflects historical terminology rather 
than contemporary biological classification or modern commercial use.
    Cephalopods--including squid, cuttlefish, octopus, and nautilus--
are mollusks but are characterized by either an internal shell, a 
reduced shell, or no shell at all. (Merriam-Webster's Collegiate 
Dictionary (12th ed. 2025)). Similarly, Cephalopods are members of the 
Cephalopoda family, which includes Ammonites, characterized by a flat-
coiled spiral shell. (Oxford English Dictionary (3d. ed., June 2026)). 
As a result, the current regulatory definition has created ambiguity as 
to whether cephalopods qualify as shellfish for purposes of wildlife 
importation, exportation, declaration, inspection, and enforcement 
under 50 CFR parts 10, 14, and related provisions.
    In practice, this ambiguity has led to inconsistent treatment of 
cephalopod products at ports of entry, confusion among regulated 
entities, and unnecessary regulatory burden on importers, exporters, 
and enforcement personnel.

Effects of the Final Rule

    After consideration of the information provided through the public 
comment process, we are finalizing this rule with minor grammatical 
corrections. We are adding the term ``Phylum'' before the word Mollusca 
in subparagraph (1) and adding a comma after ``but not limited to'' in 
subparagraphs (1) and (2). We are also removing the words ``an'' in 
subparagraph (1) and ``a'' in subparagraph (2). We have provided 
responses to questions and concerns submitted during the public comment 
period under Summary of Comments and Responses, below.
    In finalizing the specific change to the current regulations in the 
rule portion of this document and setting out the accompanying 
clarifying discussion in this preamble, we are establishing prospective 
standards only. These regulations will apply to shipments being 
imported into or exported out of the United States on or after the 
effective date of this rule and will not apply retroactively to 
shipments that were imported or exported prior to the effective date of 
this rule. For the effective date of this rule see DATES, above. 
Nothing in these revisions to the regulations is intended to require 
that the Service reevaluate actions taken on shipments of affected 
species imported or exported prior to the effective date of this rule 
on the basis of these final regulations.

Summary of Comments and Responses

    In our March 6, 2026, proposed rule (91 FR 11019), we requested 
public comments by April 6, 2026. We received a total of 69 comments, 
66 of which contained substantive remarks on the proposed rule with 
specific support or opposition to the definition change. One of the 
substantive comments was an exact duplicate of another and submitted by 
the same commenter. Two of the comments were non-substantive in nature, 
expressing either general opposition or support to the proposed rule 
with no supporting information or analysis. One comment contained no 
information. Commenters included individual members of the public, 
industry members and representative organizations, non-governmental and 
environmental organizations, and a Federal agency, among others. Below, 
we summarize and respond to the significant, substantive comments we 
received.
    Comments regarding biological, ecological and conservation 
concerns: The Service received comments from the cephalopod industry 
and their representative organizations, and one Federal agency, the 
U.S. Small Business Administration Office of Advocacy, supporting the 
proposed rule stating that the change better aligns with commercial use 
and scientific understanding of the species in question.
    The Service received comments opposed to the rule due to concerns 
that cephalopods are biologically distinct from shellfish and should 
not be consolidated into the same category as shellfish. These comments 
also stated that the very disparate source and harvest methods used for 
shellfish and cephalopods, primarily aquaculture for shellfish and 
various methods of wild harvest for cephalopods, do not support 
applying the same regulations to both taxa. Additionally, concerns were 
raised that the proposed rule ignores known risks to wild populations 
of cephalopods due to poorly regulated international harvesting. Some 
comments raised questions related to animal welfare due to the 
intelligence of cephalopods and the lack of control over international 
harvest methods.
    Several comments raised concern regarding traceability and data 
loss that could be critical to monitoring and ensuring sustainability 
of wild populations and trade. Several comments mentioned concerns that 
this proposed rule would undermine ecological management of cephalopod 
populations and their sustainability based on known concerns about the 
lack of regulations governing international sourcing of cephalopods. 
They raised concerns that the proposed rule shows a lack of thorough 
analysis of impacts of this rule on conservation and ecological 
management and sustainability. The Service received comments from the 
public and the shellfish industry stating that the proposed rule does 
not align with current scientific and taxonomic treatment of these 
species, or the common usage of the term ``shellfish'' both within the 
industry and within vernacular language.
    Response: While the Service acknowledges these concerns, this rule 
is intended to align with the statutory language (16 U.S.C. 1538(d)-
(f)) exempting shellfish and fishery products for human or animal 
consumption and to clarify whether the Service's import/export 
regulations apply to cephalopods. Current scientific classification 
agrees that cephalopods are mollusks, whether an external shell is 
present or not. Multiple other biological characteristics define the 
group of animals including a soft, unsegmented body and living in a 
damp or aquatic habitat, with some members of the group having a hard, 
external

[[Page 37334]]

shell. Most cephalopods possess a hard internal shell rather than an 
external shell, thus still qualifying them as shellfish. One instance 
where the accepted definition clearly includes cephalopods is in the 
case of a medical term for ``shellfish allergy.'' (Wai, et al. 2020, 
Gelis, et al. 2020). Squid, octopus, and cuttlefish are all included 
when referencing the common sources of shellfish allergies in the 
medical community, despite their not having an external shell. Rather 
than leave ambiguity, the Service is clarifying that the term shellfish 
includes cephalopods to align with the scientific nomenclature.
    Comments concerning enforcement considerations: Some comments 
supported the proposed rule stating that it reduces ambiguity in the 
regulatory requirements and introduces consistency and clarity to the 
import/export process. These comments also contend that there is 
sufficient regulatory oversight from other Federal and State agencies 
upon harvest, as well as import, and this rule would eliminate 
duplicative efforts by the Service.
    The Service received numerous comments raising concerns that the 
proposed rule creates gaps in regulatory oversight, both within the 
Service and between Federal agencies; weakens import controls including 
allowing a mechanism for tariff evasion; and hinders detection of 
illegal trade and IUU fishing of cephalopods. One comment stated that 
cephalopods are subject to growing legislative scrutiny and that this 
proposed rule could undermine efforts by the States and others to 
regulate this commodity.
    Response: The Service appreciates the concerns raised regarding 
these enforcement considerations. The Service works closely with its 
Federal and State agency partners to ensure proper oversight and 
enforcement actions within our jurisdictions. While cephalopods will no 
longer be subject to certain import/export requirements, the Service 
retains authority to inspect all shipments being imported into or 
exported from the United States and to ensure the legality of wildlife 
trade when there are concerns of potential illegal activities being 
conducted.
    Comments concerning the effects on trade and the public: Multiple 
industry commenters expressed strong support for the proposed rule due 
to the reduced costs to the U.S. cephalopod industry which would in 
turn be passed on to consumers. Comments stated that U.S. businesses 
would benefit from the improved regulatory efficiency since other 
Federal and State agencies provide oversight of this trade. Commenters 
also stated that the U.S. cephalopod industry would benefit from 
streamlined import and export procedures with the removal of 
limitations on ports of entry and exit and delays due to waiting for 
clearance from the Service. One commenter supported the proposed rule 
stating that the current definition is confusing, costly, redundant, 
and misdirected. The commenter argues that the proposed rule's removal 
of an unnecessary burden from the industry would allow the FWS to 
better focus on mission priorities such as wildlife trade. Another 
commenter supports the proposed rule in order to correct an outdated 
classification. The commenter appreciates that the proposed rule would 
align the Service's definition with that of other federal agencies, 
with international trade designations, and the scientific taxonomy of 
Mollusca, and, finally, enhance global competitiveness for U.S. seafood 
producers. One commenter argued that the current definition 
disadvantages U.S. seafood producers relative to foreign competitors 
and the proposed rule would remove additional costs and logistical 
obstructions currently placed on U.S producers by the U.S. government 
that hinder performance in international markets. One commenter 
supports the proposed rule and further comments on the lack of evidence 
that squid fisheries are more vulnerable to criminal or illegal 
activity than other types of fisheries included in the Service's 
current definition of shellfish.
    The Service also received some comments expressing concern over the 
potential effects of this proposed rule on the U.S. seafood trade and 
impacts to consumers and the public. These comments argued that the 
proposed rule would negatively affect U.S. businesses by reducing 
accountability and consumer confidence in product sourcing. 
Additionally, some comments argued this rule could benefit foreign 
trade competitors over U.S. businesses by removing the oversight 
mechanisms that ensure foreign competitors are held to the same high 
standards as U.S. businesses. Some comments stated that local fishing 
communities could be negatively affected by competition from foreign 
sourced products. One commenter preferred the current definition of 
shellfish, urging the Service to reject taxonomic definitions and 
maintain existing physical criteria for the regulation which includes 
bivalves while excluding other members of Mollusca. Another commenter 
described concerns with the proposed rule's potential impact on the 
sustainable aquaculture industry.
    Response: The Service appreciates the significant engagement from 
producers and from industry organizations and the supportive comments 
regarding the potential impact of the proposed rule. The Service values 
the concerns raised in some of the comments submitted, however, no one 
supplier or industry is being favored over another with this 
clarification of a definition. Rather all in the industry are subject 
to the same regulatory authority and, given that the Service retains 
the authority to inspect and ensure the legality of all wildlife 
shipments, and our close coordination with our Federal and State 
regulatory partners, proper oversight of this industry will be 
maintained. The question of whether a particular practice is 
sustainable falls outside the scope of this rulemaking, which is 
limited to revising the regulatory definition. Evaluating the 
sustainability of practices involves separate analyses and policy 
considerations that are not part of this definition change.
    Comments concerning lack of analysis of and justification for the 
proposed rule: The Service received multiple comments asserting that 
the proposed definition change is a significant change to the 
regulations and as such requires thorough consideration of the impact 
of the change to both industry and conservation to ensure it is in the 
best interests of the American public and businesses. These comments 
stated that a thorough economic analysis and examination of the extent 
of the impacts of this proposed rule are warranted. Additional comments 
stated that the proposed rule lacked sufficient justification for the 
need for the change.
    Response: The Service acknowledges the concerns raised in these 
comments; however, the rule aligns with our statutory authority. 
Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 605(b), in the publication of the proposed rule, 
the Service certified that the proposed rule, if adopted, would not 
have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small 
entities. Accordingly, an initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis is 
not required. This rule clarifies a regulatory definition and reduces 
compliance obligations that should result in a cost savings for small 
businesses. This rule does not establish new compliance requirements, 
reporting obligations, or performance standards for small entities, 
including small businesses, small nonprofit organizations, or small 
governmental jurisdictions as defined in 5 U.S.C. 601, thus, a detailed 
economic analysis is not necessary. Similarly, the Service has 
determined that the proposed rule provided sufficient justification to

[[Page 37335]]

support the change to the shellfish definition at 50 CFR 10.12.
    Comments requesting the inclusion of additional species: The 
Service received several requests to include red and purple sea urchins 
and one request to include sea cucumbers in the revised definition to 
exempt them from Service import/export requirements as well.
    Response: Red and purple sea urchins and sea cucumbers are not 
mollusks rather they are echinoderms. (Oxford English Dictionary (3d. 
ed., June 2026)). An echinoderm is radially symmetrical unlike mollusks 
where symmetry is not considered under current literary definitions. 
(Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (12th ed. 2025)). 
Additionally, Echinodermata phylum as a species frequently has fivefold 
radial symmetry, like the starfish, hardly comparable to commonly 
understood species of shellfish. (Oxford English Dictionary (3d. ed., 
June 2026)). Both sea urchins and sea cucumbers are more closely 
related to sand dollars and sea stars than to squid, lobster, or 
octopus. They differ significantly from the members of Mollusca. Sea 
urchins and sea cucumbers lack the mantle and muscular foot that 
characterizes most mollusks, even when the external shell is absent. 
Many mollusks are carnivorous, herbivorous or filter feeders with 
specialized feeding structures while the echinoderms are detritivores 
and consume sediment and organic debris, or floating particles. 
Finally, sea urchins and sea cucumbers have a unique water vascular 
system that all the members of Mollusca lack. Therefore, FWS declines 
to include sea cucumbers and sea urchins in the definition of 
shellfish.

Required Determinations

Executive Orders 12866 and 13563 (Regulatory Planning and Review)

    E.O. 12866 provides that the Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (OIRA) in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) will review 
all significant rules. OIRA has determined that this rule is not 
significant.
    E.O. 13563 reaffirms the principles of E.O. 12866 while calling for 
improvements in the nation's regulatory system to promote 
predictability, to reduce uncertainty, and to use the best, most 
innovative, and least burdensome tools for achieving regulatory ends. 
E.O. 13563 directs agencies to consider regulatory approaches that 
reduce burdens and maintain flexibility and freedom of choice for the 
public where these approaches are relevant, feasible, and consistent 
with regulatory objectives. E.O. 13563 emphasizes further that 
regulations must be based on the best available science and that the 
rulemaking process must allow for public participation and an open 
exchange of ideas. We have developed this rule in a manner consistent 
with these requirements.

Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.)

    Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA; 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., as 
amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act 
(SBREFA) of 1996), whenever an agency must publish a notice of 
rulemaking for any proposed or final rule, it must prepare and make 
available for public comment a regulatory flexibility analysis that 
describes the effects of the rule on small entities (i.e., small 
businesses, small organizations, and small government jurisdictions).
    This final rule clarifies a regulatory definition and is 
deregulatory in nature and should result in cost savings for small 
businesses. This final rule does not establish new, and reduces 
existing, compliance requirements, reporting obligations, or 
performance standards to the benefit of small entities, including small 
businesses, small nonprofit organizations, or small governmental 
jurisdictions as defined in 5 U.S.C. 601. However, we do not expect 
this potential effect to rise to the level of a significant economic 
effect nor affect a substantial number of small entities. Therefore, 
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Service hereby certifies that this 
rule will not have a significant economic effect on a substantial 
number of small entities.

Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (2 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.)

    In accordance with the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act, we have 
determined the following:
    (a) A Small Government Agency Plan is not required. We are the lead 
agency for carrying out regulations that govern and monitor the 
importation and exportation of wildlife and for carrying out U.S. 
obligations under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species (CITES). No small government assistance or impact is expected 
as a result of this proposed rule. Therefore, this proposed rule has no 
effect on small governments or their responsibilities.
    (b) This rule will not produce a Federal requirement that may 
result in the combined expenditure by State, local, or Tribal 
governments of $100 million or greater in any year, so it is not a 
significant regulatory action under the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act. 
This rule will not result in any combined expenditure by State, local, 
or Tribal governments.

Takings (E.O. 12630)

    Under E.O. 12630, this rule does not have significant takings 
implications. This rule does not affect any constitutionally protected 
property rights. It will not result in the physical occupancy of 
property, the physical invasion of property, or the regulatory taking 
of any property. A takings implication assessment is not required. The 
purpose of this rule is to clarify and streamline the requirements and 
processes related to the import and export of wildlife at U.S. ports 
and borders. Therefore, this rule does not have significant takings 
implications.

Federalism (E.O. 13132)

    Under E.O. 13132, this rule does not have significant federalism 
effects. A federalism summary impact statement is not required. This 
proposed rule will not have a substantial direct effect on the States, 
on the relationship between the Federal Government and the States, or 
on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various 
levels of government.

Civil Justice Reform (E.O. 12988)

    In accordance with E.O. 12988 (Civil Justice Reform), this rule 
does not unduly burden the judicial system and meets the requirements 
of sections 3(a) and 3(b)(2) of the Order. Specifically, this rule:
    (a) Meets the criteria of section 3(a) requiring that all 
regulations be reviewed to eliminate errors and ambiguity and be 
written to minimize litigation; and
    (b) Meets the criteria of section 3(b)(2) requiring that all 
regulations be written in clear language and contain clear legal 
standards.

Government-to-Government Relationship With Tribes

    In accordance with the President's memorandum of April 29, 1994 
(``Government-to-Government Relations With Native American Tribal 
Governments;'' 59 FR 22951, May 4, 1994), E.O. 13175 (``Consultation 
and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments''), the President's 
memorandum of November 30, 2022 (``Uniform Standards for Tribal 
Consultation;'' 87 FR 74479, December 5, 2022), and the Department of 
the Interior's manual at 512 DM 2, we readily acknowledge our 
responsibility to communicate meaningfully with federally recognized 
Tribes and Alaska Native Corporations on a government-

[[Page 37336]]

to-government basis. In accordance with S.O. 3206 of June 5, 1997 
(``American Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribal Trust 
Responsibilities, and the Endangered Species Act''), we readily 
acknowledge our responsibilities to work directly with Tribes in 
developing programs for healthy ecosystems, to acknowledge that Tribal 
lands are not subject to the same controls as Federal public lands, to 
remain sensitive to Indian culture, and to make information available 
to Tribes.

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.)

    This rule does not contain any new collection of information that 
requires approval by the OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
(44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a 
person is not required to respond to, a collection of information 
unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number.

National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.)

    We have analyzed this rule in accordance with the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA; 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.), the Department 
of the Interior (DOI) NEPA implementing regulations at 43 CFR 46.210, 
and the DOI Handbook of National Environmental Policy Act Implementing 
Procedures (516 DM 1).
    We have determined that there will be no significant individual or 
cumulative effect on the environment with the revision of the 
definition of ``shellfish'' in 50 CFR 10.12 and have applied the 
Department of the Interior categorical exclusion for ``Policies, 
directives, regulations, and guidelines: that are of an administrative, 
financial, legal, technical, or procedural nature; or whose 
environmental effects are too broad, speculative, or conjectural to 
lend themselves to meaningful analysis and will later be subject to the 
NEPA process, either collectively or case-by-case'' (43 CFR 46.210(i)). 
We have also determined the extraordinary circumstances listed in 43 
CFR 46.215 do not apply to the direct effects of this rule.

Energy Supply, Distribution, or Use (E.O. 13211)

    On May 18, 2001, the President issued E.O.13211 on regulations that 
significantly affect energy supply, distribution, and use. E.O.13211 
requires agencies to prepare Statements of Energy Effects when 
undertaking certain actions. This rule is not expected to significantly 
affect energy supplies, distribution, or use. Therefore, this action is 
not a significant energy action, and no Statement of Energy Effects is 
required.

List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 10

    Exports, Fish, Imports, Law enforcement, Plants, Transportation, 
Wildlife.

    For the reasons set forth in the preamble, we amend part 10, 
subchapter B of chapter 1, title 50 of the Code of Federal Regulations 
as follows:

PART 10--GENERAL PROVISIONS

0
1. The authority citation for part 10 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  16 U.S.C. 668a-d, 703-712, 742a-j-l, 1361-1384, 
1401-1407, 1531-1543, 3371-3378; 18 U.S.C. 42; 19 U.S.C. 1202.

Subpart B--Definitions

0
2. Amend Sec.  10.12 by revising the definition of ``Shellfish'' to 
read as follows:

Sec.  10.12  Definitions.

* * * * *
    Shellfish means an aquatic invertebrate animal of the following 
taxa:
    (1) Phylum Mollusca, including but not limited to, oysters, clams, 
squid, octopus, or cuttlefish; and
    (2) Order Decapoda, including, but not limited to, lobsters, crabs, 
crayfish, shrimp or other crustaceans; and
    (3) Any part, product, egg or offspring thereof, or the dead body 
or parts thereof (excluding fossils), of any species included in 
paragraphs (1)-(2) of this definition, whether or not included in a 
manufactured product or in a processed food product.
* * * * *

Kevin Lilly,
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks, 
Exercising the Delegated Authority of the Assistant Secretary for Fish 
and Wildlife and Parks.
[FR Doc. 2026-12578 Filed 6-22-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4333-15-P