[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 122 (Friday, June 26, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 38535-38540]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12913]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

40 CFR Part 180

[EPA-HQ-OPP-2025-0816; FRL-13411-01-OCSPP]

Cinnamaldehyde in Pesticide Formulations; Exemption From the 
Requirement for a Tolerance

AGENCY: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: This regulation establishes an exemption from the requirement 
of a tolerance for residues of cinnamaldehyde (CAS Reg. No. 104-55-2) 
when used as an inert ingredient (preservative/stabilizer) on growing 
crops and raw agricultural commodities pre- and post-harvest, limited 
to no more than 100 parts per million (ppm) in the end-use pesticide 
formulation. Wagner Regulatory Associates, Inc., on behalf of Minagro, 
submitted a petition to EPA under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (FFDCA), requesting establishment of an exemption from the 
requirement of a tolerance. This regulation eliminates the need to 
establish a maximum permissible level for residues of cinnamaldehyde, 
when used in accordance with the terms of this exemption.

DATES: This regulation is effective June 26, 2026. Objections and 
requests for hearings must be received on or before August 25, 2026 and 
must be filed in accordance with the instructions provided in 40 CFR 
part 178 (see also Unit I.C. of this document).

ADDRESSES: The docket for this action, identified by docket 
identification (ID) number EPA-HQ-OPP-2025-0816, is available online at 
 https://www.regulations.gov . Additional information about dockets 
generally, along with instructions for visiting the docket in person, 
is available at  https://www.epa.gov/dockets .

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Charles Smith, Registration Division 
(7505T), Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental Protection Agency, 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20460-0001; main telephone 
number: (202) 566-1030; email address:   [email&#160;protected]  .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

I. General Information

A. Does this action apply to me?

    You may be potentially affected by this action if you are an 
agricultural producer, food manufacturer, or pesticide manufacturer. 
The following list of North American Industrial Classification System 
(NAICS) codes is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather provides a 
guide to help readers determine whether this document applies to them.
      Crop production (NAICS code 111).
      Animal production (NAICS code 112).
      Food manufacturing (NAICS code 311).
      Pesticide manufacturing (NAICS code 32532).
    If you have any questions regarding the applicability of this 
proposed action to a particular entity, consult the person listed under 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT.

B. What is EPA's authority for taking this action?

    EPA is issuing this rulemaking under section 408 of the FFDCA, 21 
U.S.C. 346a. FFDCA section 408(c)(2)(A)(i) allows EPA to establish an 
exemption from the requirement for a tolerance (the legal limit for a 
pesticide chemical residue in or on a food) only if EPA determines that 
the exemption is ``safe.'' FFDCA section 408(c)(2)(A)(ii) defines 
``safe'' to mean that ``there is a reasonable certainty that no harm 
will result from aggregate exposure to the pesticide chemical residue, 
including all anticipated dietary exposures and all other exposures for 
which there is reliable information.'' This includes exposure through 
drinking water and in residential settings but does not include 
occupational exposure. Pursuant to FFDCA section 408(c)(2)(B), in 
establishing or maintaining in effect an exemption from the requirement 
of a tolerance, EPA must take into account the factors set forth in 
FFDCA section 408(b)(2)(C), which require EPA to give special 
consideration to exposure of infants and children to the pesticide 
chemical residue in establishing a tolerance and to ``ensure that there 
is a

[[Page 38536]]

reasonable certainty that no harm will result to infants and children 
from aggregate exposure to the pesticide chemical residue. . . . '' 
Additionally, FFDCA section 408(b)(2)(D) requires that the Agency 
consider, among other things, ``available information concerning the 
cumulative effects of a particular pesticide's residues'' and ``other 
substances that have a common mechanism of toxicity.''

C. How can I file an objection or hearing request?

    Under FFDCA section 408(g), 21 U.S.C. 346a(g), any person may file 
an objection to any aspect of this regulation and may also request a 
hearing on those objections. If you fail to file an objection to the 
final rule within the time period specified in the final rule, you will 
have waived the right to raise any issues resolved in the final rule. 
You must file your objection or request a hearing on this regulation in 
accordance with the instructions provided in 40 CFR part 178. To ensure 
proper receipt by EPA, you must identify the docket ID number EPA-HQ-
OPP-2025-0816 in the subject line on the first page of your submission. 
All objections and requests for a hearing must be in writing and must 
be received by the Hearing Clerk on or before August 25, 2026.
    EPA's Administrative Law Judges Division (ALJD), in which the 
Hearing Clerk is housed, urges parties to file and serve documents by 
electronic means only, notwithstanding any other particular 
requirements set forth in other procedural rules governing those 
proceedings. See ``Order Urging Electronic Filing and Service,'' dated 
December 3, 2025, which can be found at  https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2025-12/2025-12-03-order-urging-electronic-filing-and-service.pdf . Although EPA's regulations require submission via U.S. 
Mail or hand delivery, EPA intends to treat submissions filed via 
electronic means as properly filed submissions; therefore, EPA believes 
the preference for submission via electronic means will not be 
prejudicial. When submitting documents to the ALJD electronically, a 
person should utilize the e-filing system at  https://yosemite.epa.gov/oa/eab/eab-alj_upload.nsf .
    In addition to filing an objection or hearing request with the 
Hearing Clerk as described in 40 CFR part 178, please submit a copy of 
the filing (excluding any Confidential Business Information (CBI)) for 
inclusion in the public docket at  https://www.regulations.gov . Follow 
the online instructions for submitting comments. Do not submit 
electronically any information you consider to be CBI or other 
information whose disclosure is restricted by statute. If you wish to 
include CBI in your request, please follow the applicable instructions 
at  https://www.epa.gov/dockets/commenting-epa-dockets#rules  and clearly 
mark the information that you claim to be CBI. Information not marked 
confidential pursuant to 40 CFR part 2 may be disclosed publicly by EPA 
without prior notice.

II. Petitioned for Exemption

    In the Federal Register of December 15, 2025 (90 FR 57944, FRL-
12474-08-OCSPP), EPA issued a document pursuant to FFDCA section 408, 
21 U.S.C. 346a, announcing the filing of a pesticide petition (PP IN-
11993) by Wagner Regulatory Associates, Inc. (7217 Lancaster Pike, 
Hockessin, DE 19707) on behalf of Minagro (1, avenue Jean Monnet 1348 
Louvain-la-Neuve Belgium). The petition requested that 40 CFR 180.910 
be amended by establishing an exemption from the requirement of a 
tolerance for residues of cinnamaldehyde (CAS Reg. No. 104-55-2) when 
used as an inert ingredient (preservative/stabilizer) in pesticide 
formulations applied to growing crops or raw agricultural commodities 
pre- and post-harvest, limited to no more than 100 ppm in the end-use 
pesticide formulation. That document referenced a summary of the 
petition prepared by the petitioner, which is available in the docket. 
There were no comments received in response to the notice of filing.

III. Inert Ingredient Definition

    Inert ingredients are all ingredients that are not active 
ingredients as defined in 40 CFR 153.125 and include, but are not 
limited to, the following types of ingredients (except when they have a 
pesticidal efficacy of their own): solvents such as alcohols and 
hydrocarbons; surfactants such as polyoxyethylene polymers and fatty 
acids; carriers such as clay and diatomaceous earth; thickeners such as 
carrageenan and modified cellulose; wetting, spreading, and dispersing 
agents; propellants in aerosol dispensers; microencapsulating agents; 
and emulsifiers. The term ``inert'' is not intended to imply 
nontoxicity; the ingredient may or may not be chemically active. 
Generally, EPA has exempted inert ingredients from the requirement of a 
tolerance based on the low toxicity of the individual inert 
ingredients.

IV. Aggregate Risk Assessment and Determination of Safety

    EPA establishes exemptions from the requirement of a tolerance only 
in those cases where it can be clearly demonstrated that the risks from 
aggregate exposure to pesticide chemical residues under reasonably 
foreseeable circumstances will pose no harm to human health. In order 
to determine the risks from aggregate exposure to pesticide inert 
ingredients, the Agency considers the toxicity of the inert in 
conjunction with possible exposure to residues of the inert ingredient 
through food, drinking water, and through other exposures that occur as 
a result of pesticide use in residential settings. If EPA is able to 
determine that a finite tolerance is not necessary to ensure that there 
is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result from aggregate 
exposure to the inert ingredient, an exemption from the requirement of 
a tolerance may be established.
    Consistent with FFDCA section 408(c)(2)(A), and the factors 
specified in FFDCA section 408(c)(2)(B), EPA has reviewed the available 
scientific data and other relevant information in support of this 
action. EPA has sufficient data to assess the hazards of and to make a 
determination on aggregate exposure for cinnamaldehyde, including 
exposure resulting from the exemption established by this action. EPA's 
assessment of exposures and risks associated with cinnamaldehyde 
follows.

A. Toxicological Profile

    EPA has evaluated the available toxicity data and considered their 
validity, completeness, and reliability as well as the relationship of 
the results of the studies to human risk. EPA has also considered 
available information concerning the variability of the sensitivities 
of major identifiable subgroups of consumers, including infants and 
children. Specific information on the studies received and the nature 
of the adverse effects caused by cinnamaldehyde as well as the no-
observed-adverse-effect-level (NOAEL) and the lowest-observed-adverse-
effect-level (LOAEL) from the toxicity studies are discussed in this 
unit.
    The toxicological database of cinnamaldehyde is supported by data 
regarding trans-cinnamaldehyde. Based on the available human health 
toxicity data of the two substances, EPA has determined that it is 
appropriate to bridge trans-cinnamaldehyde data to assess 
cinnamaldehyde due to

[[Page 38537]]

similarities in the structure and physical/chemical properties.
    Cinnamaldehyde exhibits low levels of acute toxicity via the oral, 
dermal, and inhalation routes of exposure. It is a moderate dermal and 
eye irritant, and a strong dermal sensitizer. Decreased body weight in 
female rats was observed at 4100 ppm (200 mg/kg/day) in a 2-year 
chronic/carcinogenicity study. No increased offspring susceptibility 
was observed in the available studies as offspring effects (reduced 
fetal body weights) were only observed in the presence of parental 
toxicity (increased incidence of clinical signs of toxicity, reduced 
pregnancy rate, and pathological changes in the stomach) at 500 mg/kg/
day. The established chronic reference dose (1.0 mg/kg/day) will be 
protective of offspring effects. No evidence of neurotoxicity or 
immunotoxicity was observed in the available studies. Concern for 
carcinogenicity is low, based on the absence of treatment-related 
neoplastic lesions or tumors in chronic/carcinogenicity studies in rats 
and mice, and negative results in mutagenicity studies.

B. Toxicological Points of Departure/Levels of Concern

    Once a pesticide's toxicological profile is determined, EPA 
identifies toxicological points of departure (POD) and levels of 
concern to use in evaluating the risk posed by human exposure to the 
pesticide. For hazards that have a threshold below which there is no 
appreciable risk, the toxicological POD is used as the basis for 
derivation of reference values for risk assessment. PODs are developed 
based on a careful analysis of the doses in each toxicological study to 
determine the NOAEL and the LOAEL. Uncertainty/safety factors are used 
in conjunction with the POD to calculate a safe exposure level, 
generally referred to as a population-adjusted dose (PAD) or a 
reference dose, and a safe margin of exposure (MOE). For non-threshold 
risks, the Agency assumes that any amount of exposure will lead to some 
degree of risk. Thus, the Agency estimates risk in terms of the 
probability of an occurrence of the adverse effect expected in a 
lifetime. For more information on the general principles EPA uses in 
risk characterization and a complete description of the risk assessment 
process, see  https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/overview-risk-assessment-pesticide-program .
    An acute dietary endpoint was not selected because no effect 
attributable to a single dose was identified in the database. The 2-
year chronic/carcinogenicity study in rats was selected for the chronic 
dietary exposure scenario as well as short- and intermediate-term 
incidental oral, dermal and inhalation exposure scenarios. The NOAEL of 
2100 ppm (100 mg/kg/day) and LOAEL of 4100 ppm (200 mg/kg/day), based 
on decreased body weight in female rats, were selected for risk 
assessment. The study is appropriate for the duration of exposure and 
is protective of all chronic effects, including for the general 
population and the most sensitive lifestage (children). The standard 
inter- and intra-species uncertainty factors of 10x are applied (total 
uncertainty factor = 100x). The default factor of 100% is applied for 
the dermal and inhalation absorption rates.

C. Exposure Assessment

    1. Dietary Exposure from Food and Feed Uses. In evaluating dietary 
exposure to cinnamaldehyde, EPA considered exposure under the existing 
and proposed exemptions from the requirement of a tolerance. EPA 
assessed dietary exposures from cinnamaldehyde in food as follows.
    Dietary exposure (food and drinking water) may occur from the 
existing and proposed pesticidal uses of cinnamaldehyde (e.g., eating 
foods treated with pesticide formulations containing cinnamaldehyde, 
and drinking water exposures). Dietary exposure may also occur from 
non-pesticidal uses (e.g., household, personal care, cosmetics, and 
food additive), but no reliable information is available for non-
pesticidal exposures. Therefore, EPA assessed dietary exposures from 
pesticidal uses of cinnamaldehyde only.
    In conducting the dietary exposure assessment, EPA used the Dietary 
Exposure Evaluation Model software using the Food Commodity Intake 
Database, Version 4.02, which uses food consumption information from 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture's 2005-2010 National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey, What We Eat in America. As to residue 
levels in food, no residue data were submitted for cinnamaldehyde. In 
the absence of specific residue data, EPA has developed an approach 
which uses surrogate information to derive upper bound exposure 
estimates for the subject inert ingredient. Upper bound exposure 
estimates are based on the highest tolerance for a given commodity from 
a list of high-use insecticides, herbicides, and fungicides. A complete 
description of the general approach taken to assess inert ingredient 
risks in the absence of residue data is contained in the December 21, 
2021, memorandum ``Update to D361707: Dietary Exposure and Risk 
Assessments for the Inerts,'' which can be found at  http://www.regulations.gov  in docket ID number EPA-HQ-OPP-2018-0090.
    In the dietary exposure assessment, the Agency assumed that the 
residue level of the inert ingredient would be no higher than the 
highest tolerance for a given commodity. Implicit in this assumption is 
that there would be similar rates of degradation (if any) between the 
active and inert ingredient and that the concentration of inert 
ingredient in the scenarios leading to these highest levels of 
tolerances would be no higher than the concentration of the active 
ingredient.
    The Agency believes the assumptions used to estimate dietary 
exposures lead to an extremely conservative assessment of dietary risk 
due to a series of compounded conservatisms. First, assuming that the 
level of residue for an inert ingredient is equal to the level of 
residue for the active ingredient will overstate exposure. When used as 
an active ingredient, the concentrations of cinnamaldehyde in 
agricultural products are generally at least 50 percent of the product 
and often can be much higher. Further, pesticide products rarely have a 
single inert ingredient; rather, there is generally a combination of 
different inert ingredients used which additionally reduces the 
concentration of any single inert ingredient in the pesticide product 
in relation to that of the active ingredient. In the case of 
cinnamaldehyde, EPA made a specific adjustment to the dietary exposure 
assessment to account for the limit on the amount of cinnamaldehyde 
that can be used in pesticide formulations (100 ppm), rather than 
assuming that cinnamaldehyde will be present at equal quantities with 
the active ingredient.
    For the purpose of the screening level dietary risk assessment, a 
conservative drinking water concentration value of 100 parts per 
billion based on screening level modeling was used to assess the 
contribution to drinking water for the chronic dietary risk assessments 
for cinnamaldehyde.
    2. From Non-Dietary Exposure. The term ``residential exposure'' is 
used in this document to refer to non-occupational, non-dietary 
exposure (e.g., textiles (clothing and diapers), carpets, swimming 
pools, and hard surface disinfection on walls, floors, tables).
    Cinnamaldehyde can be used as an inert ingredient in pesticide 
products that are registered for specific uses that

[[Page 38538]]

may result in residential exposure, such as pesticides used in and 
around the home. Therefore, screening level residential handler and 
post-application risk assessments have been performed for common 
residential exposure scenarios, using assumptions detailed in the 2012 
Residential Standard Operating Procedures, which is available at 
 https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/standard-operating-procedures-residential-pesticide .
    3. Cumulative Effects from Substances with a Common Mechanism of 
Toxicity. Section 408(b)(2)(D)(v) of FFDCA requires that, when 
considering whether to establish, modify, or revoke a tolerance, the 
Agency consider ``available information'' concerning the cumulative 
effects of a particular pesticide's residues and ``other substances 
that have a common mechanism of toxicity.''
    EPA has not found cinnamaldehyde to share a common mechanism of 
toxicity with any other substances, and cinnamaldehyde does not appear 
to produce a toxic metabolite produced by other substances. For the 
purposes of this tolerance exemption, therefore, EPA has assumed that 
cinnamaldehyde does not have a common mechanism of toxicity with other 
substances. Information regarding EPA's efforts to determine which 
chemicals have a common mechanism of toxicity and to evaluate the 
cumulative effects of such chemicals is available at  https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/cumulative-assessment-risk-pesticides .

D. Additional Safety Factor for the Protection of Infants and Children

    Section 408(b)(2)(C) of FFDCA provides that EPA shall apply an 
additional tenfold (10X) margin of safety for infants and children in 
the case of threshold effects to account for prenatal and postnatal 
toxicity and the completeness of the database on toxicity and exposure 
unless EPA determines based on reliable data that a different margin of 
safety will be safe for infants and children. This additional margin of 
safety is commonly referred to as the Food Quality Protection Act 
(FQPA) safety factor. In applying this provision, EPA either retains 
the default value of 10X or uses a different additional safety factor 
when reliable data available to EPA support the choice of a different 
factor.
    Based on the evaluation of available toxicity studies, there is low 
concern for pre- and postnatal susceptibility from exposure to 
cinnamaldehyde. The FQPA safety factor has been reduced to 1X because: 
(1) the toxicity database is adequate to characterize potential pre- 
and postnatal risk; (2) the established POD of 2100 ppm (100 mg/kg/day) 
will be protective of reduced fetal body weight seen at 4100 ppm (500 
mg/kg/day) in the developmental toxicity study in rats; (3) no evidence 
of neurotoxicity was observed in the database; and (4) the assumptions 
for the exposure assessment are conservative and unlikely to 
underestimate risk.

E. Aggregate Risks and Determination of Safety

    EPA determines whether acute and chronic dietary pesticide 
exposures are safe by comparing aggregate exposure estimates to the 
acute PAD (aPAD) and chronic PAD (cPAD). For linear cancer risks, EPA 
calculates the lifetime probability of acquiring cancer given the 
estimated aggregate exposure. Short-, intermediate-, and chronic-term 
risks are evaluated by comparing the estimated aggregate food, water, 
and residential exposure to the appropriate PODs to ensure that an 
adequate MOE exists.
    1. Acute Risk. An acute aggregate risk assessment takes into 
account acute exposure estimates from dietary consumption of food and 
drinking water. No adverse effect resulting from a single oral exposure 
was identified, and no acute dietary endpoint was selected. Therefore, 
cinnamaldehyde is not expected to pose an acute risk.
    2. Chronic Risk. Using the exposure assumptions described in this 
unit for chronic exposure, EPA has concluded that chronic exposure to 
cinnamaldehyde from food and water will utilize approximately 1% and 2% 
of the cPAD for the U.S. population and children 1-2 years old (the 
most highly exposed populations). Therefore, cinnamaldehyde is not 
expected to pose a chronic risk.
    3. Short- and Intermediate-Term Risks. Short- and intermediate-term 
aggregate exposures take into account short- and intermediate-term 
residential exposures plus chronic exposures to food and water 
(considered to be a background exposure level).
    Cinnamaldehyde can be used as an inert ingredient in pesticide 
products that are registered for uses that could result in short-term 
residential exposure, and the Agency has determined that it is 
appropriate to aggregate chronic exposure through food and water with 
short-term residential exposures to cinnamaldehyde.
    Using the exposure assumptions described in this unit for short- 
and intermediate-term exposures, EPA has concluded the combined short- 
and intermediate-term food, water, and residential exposures result in 
an aggregate MOE of 12658 for adults. Adult residential exposure 
combines high-end dermal and inhalation residential handler exposure 
from aerosol spray/trigger pump application with high-end post-
application dermal exposure from contact with treated lawns. The 
combined short- and intermediate-term aggregated food, water, and 
residential pesticide exposures result in an aggregate MOE of 3154 for 
children. Children's residential exposure is based on total exposures 
associated with contact with treated lawns (dermal and hand-to-mouth 
exposures). Because EPA's level of concern for cinnamaldehyde is an MOE 
of 100 or below, these MOEs are not of concern.
    4. Cancer Risk. EPA has not identified any concerns for 
carcinogenicity relating to cinnamaldehyde. Therefore, cinnamaldehyde 
is not expected to pose a cancer risk.

F. Analytical Enforcement Methodology

    An analytical method is not required for enforcement purposes since 
the Agency is not establishing a numerical tolerance for residues of 
cinnamaldehyde in or on any food commodities. EPA is establishing a 
limitation on the amount of cinnamaldehyde that may be used in 
pesticide formulations. This limitation will be enforced through the 
pesticide registration process under the Federal Insecticide, 
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, 7 U.S.C. 136 et seq. EPA will not 
register any pesticide formulation for food use that exceeds 100 ppm 
cinnamaldehyde in the final pesticide formulation to be applied pre- or 
post-harvest.

G. Conclusions

    Therefore, an exemption from the requirement of a tolerance is 
established for residues of cinnamaldehyde (CAS Reg. No. 104-55-2) when 
used as an inert ingredient (preservative/stabilizer) in pesticide 
formulations applied to growing crops and raw agricultural commodities 
after harvest under 40 CFR 180.910, limited to no more than 100 ppm in 
the end-use pesticide formulation.

V. Statutory and Executive Order Reviews

    Additional information about these statutes and Executive Orders 
can be found at  https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/and-executive-orders .

[[Page 38539]]

A. Executive Order 12866: Regulatory Planning and Review

    This action is exempt from review under Executive Order 12866 (58 
FR 51735, October 4, 1993), because it establishes or modifies a 
pesticide tolerance or a tolerance exemption under FFDCA section 408 in 
response to a petition submitted to the Agency. The Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) has exempted these types of actions from 
review under Executive Order 12866.

B. Executive Order 14192: Unleashing Prosperity Through Deregulation

    Executive Order 14192 (90 FR 9065, February 6, 2025) does not apply 
because actions that establish a tolerance or a tolerance exemption 
under FFDCA section 408 are exempted from review under Executive Order 
12866.

C. Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA)

    This action does not impose an information collection burden under 
the PRA 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq., because it does not contain any 
information collection activities.

D. Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)

    This action is not subject to the RFA, 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq. The RFA 
applies only to rules subject to notice and comment rulemaking 
requirements under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. 
553, or any other statute. This rule is not subject to the APA but is 
subject to FFDCA section 408(d), which does not require notice and 
comment rulemaking to take this action in response to a petition.

E. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (UMRA)

    This action does not contain an unfunded mandate of $100 million or 
more (in 1995 dollars and adjusted annually for inflation) as described 
in UMRA, 2 U.S.C. 1531-1538, and does not significantly or uniquely 
affect small governments. The action imposes no enforceable duty on any 
State, local or Tribal governments or the private sector.

F. Executive Order 13132: Federalism

    This action does not have federalism implications as specified in 
Executive Order 13132 (64 FR 43255, August 10, 1999), because it will 
not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship 
between the National Government and the States, or on the distribution 
of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government.

G. Executive Order 13175: Consultation and Coordination With Indian 
Tribal Governments

    This action does not have Tribal implications as specified in 
Executive Order 13175 (65 FR 67249, November 9, 2000), because it will 
not have substantial direct effects on Tribal governments, on the 
relationship between the Federal Government and the Indian Tribes, or 
on the distribution of power and responsibilities between the Federal 
Government and Indian Tribes.

H. Executive Order 13045: Protection of Children From Environmental 
Health Risks and Safety Risks

    This action is not subject to Executive Order 13045 (62 FR 19885, 
April 23, 1997) because it is not a significant regulatory action under 
section 3(f)(1) of Executive Order 12866 (See Unit VI.A.), and because 
EPA does not believe the environmental health or safety risks addressed 
by this action present a disproportionate risk to children.
    However, EPA's 2026 Policy on Children's Health applies to this 
action. This rule finalizes tolerance actions under the FFDCA, which 
requires EPA to give special consideration to exposure of infants and 
children to the pesticide chemical residue in establishing a tolerance 
and to ``ensure that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will 
result to infants and children from aggregate exposure to the pesticide 
chemical residue . . .'' (FFDCA 408(b)(2)(C)). The Agency's 
consideration is documented in Unit IV and the pesticide-specific 
review documents, located in the applicable docket at  https://www.regulations.gov .

I. Executive Order 13211: Actions Concerning Regulations That 
Significantly Affect Energy Supply, Distribution or Use

    This action is not subject to Executive Order 13211 (66 FR 28355) 
(May 22, 2001) because it is not a significant regulatory action under 
Executive Order 12866.

J. National Technology Transfer Advancement Act (NTTAA)

    This action does not involve technical standards that would require 
Agency consideration under NTTAA section 12(d), 15 U.S.C. 272.

K. Congressional Review Act (CRA)

    This action is subject to the CRA, 5 U.S.C. 801 et seq., and EPA 
will submit a rule report to each House of the Congress and to the 
Comptroller General of the United States. This action is not a ``major 
rule'' as defined by 5 U.S.C. 804(2).

List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 180

    Environmental protection, Administrative practice and procedure, 
Agricultural commodities, Pesticides and pests, Reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements.

    Dated: June 9, 2026.
Charles Smith,
Director, Registration Division, Office of Pesticide Programs.
    For the reasons stated in the preamble, EPA is amending 40 CFR 
chapter I as follows:

PART 180--TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES 
IN FOOD

0
1. The authority citation for part 180 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  21 U.S.C. 321(q), 346a and 371.

0
2. In Sec.  180.910, amend Table 1 to Sec.  180.910 by adding, in 
alphabetical order, an entry for ``cinnamaldehyde'' to read as follows:

Sec.  180.910  Inert ingredients used pre- and post-harvest; exemptions 
from the requirement of a tolerance.

* * * * *

                           Table 1 to 180.910
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Inert ingredients               Limits               Uses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
                              * * * * * * *
Cinnamaldehyde (CAS Reg. No. 104- Not more than 100   Preservative/
 55-2).                            ppm in the end-     Stabilizer.
                                   use pesticide
                                   formulation.
 
                              * * * * * * *
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 38540]]

[FR Doc. 2026-12913 Filed 6-25-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6560-50-P