[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 120 (Wednesday, June 24, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 37831-37836]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12766]

[[Page 37831]]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 1

[WC Docket Nos. 19-195 and 11-10; GN Docket No. 25-133; FCC 26-33; FR 
ID 351664]

Establishing the Digital Opportunity Data Collection; Modernizing 
the FCC Form 477 Data Program; Delete, Delete, Delete

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission 
(Commission) adopted an Order that takes steps to streamline the 
processes associated with the Broadband Data Collection (BDC) and the 
National Broadband Map and alleviates unnecessary regulatory burdens on 
service providers and challenge process participants. The Order aligns 
reporting requirements for broadband availability and subscription 
data, expressly declines to adopt a proposal to require satellite 
providers to submit additional certifications and supporting data, 
streamlines the Fabric challenge process, adopts a maximally-
streamlined process by which the BDC system automatically removes areas 
or locations that fail a verification or audit without requiring the 
provider to update its availability data after receiving notice of the 
failed verification or audit, and makes certain ministerial changes.

DATES: Effective July 24, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jamile Kadre, Broadband Data Task 
Force, at   [email&#160;protected]   or (202) 418-2245.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Sixth 
Report and Order (Order), in WC Docket Nos. 19-195, 11-10; GN Docket 
No. 25-133, FCC 26-33, adopted on May 20, 2026, and released on May 21, 
2026. The full text of this document is available for public inspection 
and can be downloaded at  https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-33A1.pdf . Alternative formats are available for people with 
disabilities (Braille, large print, electronic files, audio format) by 
sending an email to   [email&#160;protected]   or calling the Commission's Consumer 
and Government Affairs Bureau at (202) 418-0503.
    Final Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 Analysis. The rulemaking 
required under the Broadband DATA Act is exempt from review by Office 
of Management and Budget (OMB) and from the requirements of the 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), Public Law 104-13. As a result, 
the Report and Order will not be submitted to OMB for review under 
Section 3507(d) of the PRA.
    Congressional Review Act. The Commission will send a copy of this 
Report & Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in a report to 
be sent to Congress and the Government Accountability Office pursuant 
to the Congressional Review Act, see 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

Synopsis

Biannual Data Collection Submissions

    Aligning Reporting Requirements for Broadband Availability and 
Subscription Data. We adopt the Commission's proposal from the Fourth 
FNPRM to modify our rules so that Form 477 uses the same definition of 
``broadband'' as the BDC. We believe that this change clarifies 
reporting requirements and reduces confusion among providers without 
materially affecting the Form 477 data collection or the BDC. Our 
adoption of this proposal is also consistent with Congress' mandate 
from the Broadband DATA Act to ``harmonize reporting requirements and 
procedures regarding the deployment of broadband internet access 
service.'' Specifically, we update the definition of ``broadband 
connection'' in 47 CFR 1.7001(a)(1) so that it refers to connections of 
a ``broadband internet access service'' as defined in 47 CFR 8.1(b).
    Facilities-based providers of broadband services--both fixed and 
mobile--are required to report in their Form 477 filings the number of 
broadband connections in service (i.e., subscriptions) on the ``as of'' 
date of the filing. For Form 477 purposes, a broadband connection is 
currently defined as ``[a] wired line, wireless channel, or satellite 
service that terminates at an end user location or mobile device and 
enables the end user to receive information from and/or send 
information to the internet at information transfer rates exceeding 200 
kilobits per second (kbps) in at least one direction.'' Meanwhile, the 
BDC collects information on the availability of broadband internet 
access service, which is defined in the Broadband DATA Act as ``a mass-
market retail service by wire or radio that provides the capability to 
transmit data to and receive data from all or substantially all 
internet endpoints, including any capabilities that are incidental to 
and enable the operation of the communications service, but excluding 
dial-up internet access service.''
    As discussed in the Fourth FNPRM, we believe the definition in the 
Broadband DATA Act is, on net, narrower than that used in the 
collection of connections in service through Form 477. Form 477 
currently collects information on both mass-market retail connections 
and those sold on a customized basis, the latter of which are outside 
the scope of the BDC. At the same time, the BDC currently collects 
information on the availability of very low bandwidth, mass-market 
broadband services that are outside the scope of Form 477. Imposing a 
common definition of broadband on both data collections thus 
simultaneously narrows the scope of Form 477 by removing customized 
broadband services and expands the scope of Form 477 by including very 
low bandwidth, mass-market broadband. Specifically, Form 477 will now 
collect data on connections that do not exceed the ``200 kbps in at 
least one direction'' floor established in the prior definition. We 
believe, however, that there are very few connections that deliver a 
broadband internet access service at speeds that do not exceed 200 kbps 
in at least one direction that are also not delivered via a dial-up 
service. When taken together, we do not believe this change will have a 
material effect on the Form 477 data collection.
    Several commenters supported our adoption of this proposal. We 
agree with NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association (NTCA) that better 
alignment of the collections will improve our data validation processes 
and allow better comparisons of BDC and FCC Form 477 data. We decline, 
however, to adopt NTCA and Vantage Point Solutions' proposals to 
require providers of facilities-based fixed voice service to report 
locations where their services are available. Neither the Commission's 
existing rules nor the Broadband DATA Act require providers to report 
the availability of fixed voice services. Adopting such a requirement 
would impose new burdens on certain fixed voice service providers, and 
we find that the record does not offer sufficient justification for 
this additional reporting that falls beyond both the scope and the 
purpose of the BDC and the NBM.
    No Additional Certifications and Supporting Data from Satellite 
Providers. We expressly decline to require the additional 
certifications and supporting data from satellite providers on which 
the Commission sought comment in the Fourth FNPRM. Next-generation 
satellite services continue to

[[Page 37832]]

deploy and evolve at a rapid pace, resulting in reported service 
available to over 99.7% of all locations included on the NBM. A variety 
of circumstances, often unique to the individual location in question, 
may affect the availability of an otherwise broadly available satellite 
service offering at a specific location. For example, natural terrain 
such as mountains or trees could impact service availability if such 
terrain obstructs the view of the relevant satellite or satellite 
system in orbit.
    In the Third Report and Order, the Commission determined that it 
would rely upon verification measures to help ensure the accuracy of 
satellite broadband availability data. The Commission reminded 
satellite providers that ``the standards for availability reporting 
that apply to all fixed services require that satellite providers 
include only locations that they are currently serving or meet the 
broadband installation standard.'' The Commission also reminded 
satellite providers that they can only report an ability to serve an 
area upon a reasonable basis, ``taking into account current and 
expected locations of spot beams, capacity constraints, and other 
relevant factors.'' Updated verification specifications were issued in 
2024 to better assist staff in verifying availability data. Staff 
notified all providers, including satellite providers, that they must 
maintain supporting data for each reporting period and that the 
Commission may collect such data in the context of the Commission's 
statutory obligations to verify broadband service availability data.
    The Fourth FNPRM sought comment on whether to require satellite 
providers to include in their biannual submissions the infrastructure 
data set forth in Sections 2.3.1, 2.3.2, and 2.3.4 of the BDC Provider 
Infrastructure Data Specifications issued in 2024 and whether, in the 
event that such infrastructure data are required, the Commission should 
make the data available to the public. The information included in the 
satellite provider infrastructure portion of the data specifications is 
largely based upon categories of data that each provider is already 
required to submit as part of its FCC Form 312 (Application for 
Satellite Space and Earth Station Authorizations) and accompanying 
Schedule S (Technical and Operational Appendix). The Fourth FNPRM also 
sought comment on the burden that requiring such increased data 
reporting on a biannual basis would place upon satellite providers. In 
addition, the Commission sought comment on any other data from 
satellite providers that could be collected that would provide better 
insights into their broadband availability data.
    The record developed in response is mixed, with some commenters 
opposing the proposal to require filing additional infrastructure data 
and supporting capacity information as part of providers' biannual 
submissions and some commenters supporting the proposal and arguing the 
collection would benefit the public. On balance, we find that any 
potential benefit in routinely collecting such information in satellite 
providers' biannual submissions is outweighed by the burden created in 
requiring a duplicative submission of the data in FCC Form 312 and 
Schedule S. We therefore decline to adopt the Commission's proposals 
from the Fourth FNPRM.

Fabric Challenge Process Improvements

    Eliminating Requirement that Fabric Challenges be Shared with 
Service Providers. We adopt the proposals set forth in the Fourth FNPRM 
to eliminate the requirement to notify service providers of Fabric 
challenges and the requirement that service providers be afforded an 
opportunity to respond to such challenges during the Fabric development 
cycle. Further, we clarify the Commission's interpretation that the 
language from the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) 
permitting provider responses and setting a deadline for the Commission 
to resolve challenges only applies to availability challenges and not 
to Fabric challenges. Service providers will continue to be notified of 
accepted Fabric challenges before the next version of the map is 
published and will then have an opportunity to challenge any results 
with which they disagree.
    As currently implemented, the BDC system publishes information 
about in-progress and resolved Fabric challenges on a monthly basis as 
publicly available data downloads on the NBM. The BDC system does not 
separately alert providers of accepted Fabric challenges. The 
Commission has deemed the existence of the monthly data downloads that 
include information on Fabric challenges to be sufficient to meet the 
existing notice requirement and determined that any subsequent 
challenges submitted by a provider to these locations would constitute 
an opportunity to respond. This approach allows providers to identify 
which Fabric challenges are relevant to their current or future BDC 
filings, including areas where they plan to expand their networks. To 
date, exceedingly few locations that were previously the subject of a 
Fabric challenge have been subsequently challenged by another entity 
after resolution of the former challenge.
    The Fourth FNPRM proposed to eliminate the requirement that the BDC 
system alert providers of accepted Fabric challenges, along with the 
related requirement that providers be afforded an opportunity to 
respond to Fabric challenges before the challenges are included for 
processing of the next version of the Fabric. WISPA--The Association 
for Broadband Without Boundaries (WISPA) states that it ``does not 
oppose the Commission's proposal to eliminate the requirement that the 
BDC system alert a provider of accepted Fabric challenges and that 
service providers be afforded an opportunity to directly respond to 
Fabric challenges in-cycle.'' USTelecom--The Broadband Association 
(USTelecom) supports both the proposal to eliminate the requirement of 
notifying a provider of Fabric challenges and the Commission continuing 
to notify the provider when changes are made to each version of the 
Fabric. Pew Charitable Trusts encourages ``the Commission to create a 
tailored notification system to inform state broadband offices and 
local jurisdictions of relevant changes within their jurisdiction.'' 
Other commenters oppose eliminating the requirements that providers be 
notified of and allowed to respond to challenges before the challenges 
are included for processing of the next version of the Fabric. These 
commenters argue notice is necessary to provide clarity about the 
challenges and an opportunity to learn the outcomes of their Fabric 
challenges.
    We conclude that the adoption of these proposals to eliminate 
notice requirements and responses to challenges will clarify any 
ambiguity in the Commission's rules and streamline the process for 
resolving Fabric challenges and incorporating challenge results into 
the next version of the Fabric. Conversely, implementing a more robust 
notification system and permitting additional time for service 
providers to respond to in-progress Fabric challenges would inherently 
add more complexity to the existing process by which the Commission 
updates the Fabric on a biannual basis and would substantially increase 
the amount of time it takes to resolve Fabric challenges and may impact 
Fabric data generation timelines. The Commission will continue to make 
data on Fabric challenges available in the data downloads published on 
the NBM, including the ability to download state-specific files. The 
Commission will also continue to provide challengers with

[[Page 37833]]

responses to their Fabric challenges in advance of incorporation of 
these challenge data into the Fabric.
    In the Fourth FNPRM, the Commission also proposed to interpret 
language in the IIJA requiring it to resolve challenges within 90 days 
of a final response by the provider to be inapplicable as to Fabric 
challenges. In today's Order, we clarify that the Commission's 
interpretation that the IIJA language permitting provider responses and 
setting a deadline for the Commission to resolve challenges is only 
applicable to availability challenges and not to Fabric challenges.
    Adopting New Rule Subsection for Fabric Challenge Process. The 
Fourth FNPRM proposed to modify the Commission's rules to better 
distinguish between fixed availability and Fabric challenges by moving 
the rules pertinent to Fabric challenges into their own subsection. One 
commenter opined on this proposal and supported the change; none 
opposed the proposal. It is our view that the current language of Sec.  
1.7006 conflates availability and Fabric challenges and can be 
confusing to interpret given the differences between the two 
processes--for example, the functional difference between challenging 
availability data (i.e., claims of service by providers) and Fabric 
challenges (challenging the dataset of all BSLs across the country), 
different reasons for filing a challenge (availability of broadband 
versus the existence of a BSL on the map), etc.--and that having 
separate sections explaining the distinct challenge processes would 
improve and clarify the Commission's rules. Thus, we adopt the Fourth 
FNPRM's proposal to adopt a new rule subsection for the Fabric 
challenge process.

Streamlining Mobile and Fixed Verification and Audit Processes

    Next, we adopt changes to Sec.  1.7009(d) to remove the obligation 
of providers to update their BDC data based on adverse verification 
results and add Sec.  1.7009(e) to require Commission staff to modify 
or remove the provider's BDC data from the NBM after the provider is 
notified of an adverse audit or verification finding. We adopt these 
changes in order to streamline the closeout process for a failed 
verification or audit, ensuring the NBM reflects corrected data in a 
timely fashion. This update to the rules will also clarify for 
providers the potential ramifications stemming specifically from an 
adverse finding in a verification or audit.
    In the Fourth Report and Order, the Commission delegated authority 
to OEA, in coordination with WTB, the Wireline Competition Bureau 
(WCB), and the Space Bureau (SB), to continue to perform verifications 
and audits of the biannual data filed by providers in the BDC using the 
tools currently available, including the authority to establish 
methodologies and procedures for selecting providers and locations or 
areas subject to verification or audit. Pursuant to Sec.  1.7009(d) of 
the Commission's rules, ``[p]roviders must file corrected data when 
they discover inaccuracy, omission, or significant reporting error in 
the original data that they submitted, whether through self-discovery, 
the crowdsource process, the challenge process, the Commission 
verification process, or otherwise.'' Section 1.7009(d)(1) then states 
that ``[p]roviders must file corrections within 30 days of their 
discovery of incorrect or incomplete data.'' As the Commission noted in 
the Fourth FNPRM, ``[i]n the case of mobile wireless coverage subject 
to a verification inquiry, we have also made clear that `we may treat 
any targeted [mobile wireless coverage] areas that . . . fail 
verification as a failure to file required data in a timely manner and 
that the Commission may make modifications to the data presented on the 
broadband map (i.e., by removing some or all of the targeted area from 
the provider's coverage maps).''' The Commission added that it had 
``not been as explicit in announcing that similar procedures and 
remedies would apply in response to determinations made as a result of 
verification of fixed availability data or in the case of audits (of 
both fixed and mobile data).''
    To create clarity for providers, in the Fourth FNPRM, the 
Commission sought comment on its tentative conclusion ``that it would 
be beneficial to clarify in our rule that, in the event a provider's 
response to a verification inquiry or an audit does not support its 
availability filing--whether due to an incomplete response or where the 
response demonstrates that service is not available'' then the data 
must be updated accordingly after the provider is notified of the 
Commission's finding. In response, commenters cited the need for staff 
to ensure the accuracy of the NBM and supported ``the Commission's 
proposed clarification of authority on the removal of locations from 
filings that are found to be inaccurate.'' USTelecom stated ``there is 
a need to remove locations without availability from the map'' and that 
``it seems unnecessary for providers to be required to regenerate a new 
filing within 30 days of an audit if the [BDC] system has an automated 
way to perform the same function.'' We agree with commenters and add 
Sec.  1.7009(e) specifically to clarify that the Commission will update 
the NBM, which may include amending or removing some or all of a 
provider's BDC data after an adverse verification or audit inquiry. We 
find that this clarification will streamline the outcome of 
verifications and audits, improve the accuracy for the NBM, align with 
how the BDC system is designed to process the amendment or removal of 
locations or areas after adverse verification or audit findings, and 
eliminate the burden on providers to meet a 30-day correction window, 
particularly small business providers who may have limited staffing and 
monetary resources. Adoption of this rule change does not foreclose 
other Commission remedies for misreporting data, including enforcement 
action and/or other penalties as set forth in the Communications Act 
and other applicable laws.

Ministerial Changes

    We amend Sec. Sec.  1.7001(d)(4), 1.7003, and 1.7010 to modernize 
the BDC rules to reflect organizational changes to the Commission since 
2023. In 2023, the Commission created two separate entities from the 
former International Bureau (IB)--the Space Bureau (SB) and the Office 
of International Affairs (OIA). Because satellite broadband providers 
are required to file in the BDC, the Space Bureau remains actively 
involved in BDC matters since the Space Bureau has regulatory 
responsibilities relating to satellite technology and space-based 
services. Sections 1.7001(d)(4), 1.7003, and 1.7010 were amended to 
replace the references to IB with references to OIA and SB for 
authority to disclose provider-specific data contained in FCC Form 477, 
update FCC Form 477, and update the Digital Opportunity Data 
Collection.
    SB has explicit delegated authority, along with WTB and WCB, to 
coordinate with OEA on BDC matters. OIA is not named as an Office with 
delegated authority to update rules for the BDC. Therefore, the 
references in Sec. Sec.  1.7001(d)(4), 1.7003, and 1.7010 to ``Office 
of International Affairs'' are removed.
    We also amend Sec.  1.7005(e) to clarify the rule's purpose as 
requiring public release of all provider-specific broadband 
availability data without delineating the specific subcomponents of 
these data. This ministerial change increases clarity for providers by 
simplifying the rule language without substantively changing the scope 
of the current rule.

[[Page 37834]]

Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

    As required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended 
(RFA), the Federal Communications Commission (Commission) incorporated 
an Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) in the Establishing 
the Digital Opportunity Data Collection, et al., Fourth Further Notice 
of Proposed Rulemaking (Fourth FNPRM), released in July 2024. The 
Commission sought written public comment on the proposals in the Fourth 
FNPRM, including comment on the IFRA. No comments were filed addressing 
the IRFA.

A. Need for, and Objectives of, the Rules

    In the Sixth Report and Order (Order), the Commission takes steps 
to improve the accuracy of its Broadband Data Collection (BDC) by 
streamlining processes while alleviating regulatory burdens on service 
providers and challenge process participants. The Order also includes 
edits to restructure or update references in the BDC rules. These 
revisions will reduce burdens on providers by harmonizing key 
definitions across filings, removing unnecessary notification 
processes, and streamlining responses to audits, which should result in 
cost savings for service providers, including small entities.

B. Summary of Significant Issues Raised by Public Comments in Response 
to the IRFA

    No comments were filed addressing the impact of the proposed rules 
on small entities.

C. Response to Comments by the Chief Counsel for the Small Business 
Administration Office of Advocacy

    Pursuant to the Small Business Jobs Act of 2010, which amended the 
RFA,\[1]\ the Commission is required to respond to any comments filed 
by the Chief Counsel for the Small Business Administration (SBA) Office 
of Advocacy, and also provide a detailed statement of any change made 
to the proposed rules as a result of those comments.\[2]\ The Chief 
Counsel did not file any comments in response to the proposed rules in 
this proceeding.

D. Description and Estimate of the Number of Small Entities to Which 
the Rules Will Apply

    The RFA directs agencies to provide a description of, and where 
feasible, an estimate of the number of small entities that may be 
affected by the adopted rules.\[3]\ The RFA generally defines the term 
``small entity'' as having the same meaning as the terms ``small 
business,'' ``small organization,'' and ``small governmental 
jurisdiction.'' \[4]\ In addition, the term ``small business'' has the 
same meaning as the term ``small business concern'' under the Small 
Business Act.\[5]\ A ``small business concern'' is one which: (1) is 
independently owned and operated; (2) is not dominant in its field of 
operation; and (3) satisfies any additional criteria established by the 
SBA.\[6]\ The SBA establishes small business size standards that 
agencies are required to use when promulgating regulations relating to 
small businesses; agencies may establish alternative size standards for 
use in such programs, but must consult and obtain approval from SBA 
before doing so.
    Our actions, over time, may affect small entities that are not 
easily categorized at present. We therefore describe three broad groups 
of small entities that could be directly affected by our actions.\[8]\ 
In general, a small business is an independent business having fewer 
than 500 employees.\[9]\ These types of small businesses represent 
99.9% of all businesses in the United States, which translates to 34.75 
million businesses.\[10]\ Next, ``small organizations'' are not-for-
profit enterprises that are independently owned and operated and are 
not dominant in their field.\[11]\ While we do not have data regarding 
the number of non-profits that meet that criteria, over 99% of 
nonprofits have fewer than 500 employees.\[12]\ Finally, ``small 
governmental jurisdictions'' are defined as cities, counties, towns, 
townships, villages, school districts, or special districts with 
populations of less than fifty thousand.\[13]\ Based on the 2022 U.S. 
Census of Governments data, we estimate that at least 48,724 out of 
90,835 local government jurisdictions have a population of less than 
50,000.\[14]\
    The rules adopted in the Order will apply to small entities in the 
industries identified in the chart below by their six-digit North 
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) \[15]\ codes and 
corresponding SBA size standard.\[16]\ Where available, we also provide 
additional information regarding the number of potentially affected 
entities in the industries identified below.

                               Table 1--2022 U.S. Census Bureau Data by NAICS Code
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Regulated industry (footnotes
   specify potentially affected                                                      Total small
    entities within a regulated      NAICS code    SBA size standard    Total firms     firms      % Small firms
    industry where applicable)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wired Telecommunications Carriers.       517111  1,500 employees......        3,403        3,027           88.95
Wireless Telecommunications              517112  1,500 employees......        1,184        1,081           91.30
 Carriers (except Satellite).
Satellite Telecommunications......       517410  $44 million..........          332          195           58.73
All Other Telecommunications......       517810  $40 million..........        1,673        1,007           60.19
Electric Power Generators,                 2211  250-1000.............        2,626        2,103           80.08
 Transmitters and Distributors.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Table 2--Telecommunications Service Provider Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2024 Universal service monitoring report telecommunications service      SBA size standard (1,500 employees)
              provider data (data as of December 2023)              --------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------   Total # FCC
                                                                        Form 499A    Small firms      % Small
                          Affected entity                                filers                      entities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wired Telecommunications Carriers..................................           4,682        4,276           91.33
Wireless Telecommunications Carriers (except Satellite)............             585          498           85.13
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 37835]]

E. Description of Economic Impact and Projected Reporting, 
Recordkeeping and Other Compliance Requirements for Small Entities

    The RFA directs agencies to describe the economic impact of adopted 
rules on small entities, as well as projected reporting, recordkeeping 
and other compliance requirements, including an estimate of the classes 
of small entities which will be subject to the requirement and the type 
of professional skills necessary for preparation of the report or 
record.
    The rules adopted in the Order will reduce burdens on small and 
other service providers by harmonizing key definitions across filings, 
removing unnecessary notification processes, and streamlining responses 
to audits, which may result in cost savings for filers, including small 
entities. Specifically, we modify our rules so that Form 477 uses the 
definition of ``broadband connection'' found in Sec.  1.7001(a)(1) of 
the Commission's rules so that it refers to connections of a 
``broadband internet access service'' as defined in Sec.  8.1(b) of the 
Commission's rules. We believe that this change clarifies reporting 
requirements and reduces confusion among small and other providers 
without materially affecting the Form 477 data collection or the BDC. 
Additionally, the Order declined to adopt a proposal to require 
providers to report the availability of fixed voice services, which 
would impose new burdens on certain fixed voice service providers 
without sufficient justification for this additional reporting. The 
Order also declined to require additional certifications and supporting 
data from satellite providers.
    The Order also adopts changes to Sec.  1.7009(d) of the 
Commission's rules to remove the obligation of providers to update 
their BDC data based on adverse verification results, and adds Sec.  
1.7009(e) to require Commission staff to modify or remove the 
provider's BDC data from the National Broadband Map (NBM) after the 
provider is notified of an adverse audit or verification finding. These 
changes will eliminate the burden on providers to meet a 30-day 
correction window, particularly small business providers who may have 
limited staff and resources comply with such an obligation. We do not 
anticipate additional costs associated with complying with the rules 
adopted in the Order because they do not create new or additional 
reporting, recordkeeping, or other compliance requirements for small 
service providers.

F. Discussion of Steps Taken To Minimize the Significant Economic 
Impact on Small Entities, and Significant Alternatives Considered

    The RFA requires an agency to provide ``a description of the steps 
the agency has taken to minimize the significant economic impact on 
small entities . . . including a statement of the factual, policy, and 
legal reasons for selecting the alternative adopted in the final rule 
and why each one of the other significant alternatives to the rule 
considered by the agency which affect the impact on small entities was 
rejected.''
    In the Order, we take steps to streamline processes that serve as 
important checks on the accuracy of BDC data and consider alternatives 
to alleviate unnecessary regulatory burdens on small and other service 
providers and challenge process participants. We also make certain 
ministerial edits to restructure or update references in the BDC rules. 
For example, we adopt the Commission's proposal from the Fourth FNPRM 
to modify our rules so that Form 477 uses the same definition of 
``broadband'' as the BDC. This alternative clarifies reporting 
requirements and reduces confusion among providers without materially 
affecting the Form 477 data collection or the BDC. Additionally, the 
Order declines to adopt a proposal to require providers to report the 
availability of fixed voice services because such a requirement would 
impose additional reporting obligations on certain fixed voice service 
providers that are not supported by the record.
    We also decline to adopt a proposal to require the additional 
certifications and supporting data from satellite providers about which 
the Commission sought comment in the Fourth FNPRM. On balance, we find 
that any potential benefit in routinely collecting such information in 
satellite providers' biannual submissions is outweighed by the burden 
created in requiring a duplicative submission of the data in FCC Form 
312 and Schedule S.
    In addition, we considered the proposals set forth in the Fourth 
FNPRM to eliminate the requirement to notify service providers of 
Fabric challenges and the requirement that service providers be 
afforded an opportunity to respond to such challenges during the Fabric 
development cycle. Further, we clarify that the Commission's 
interpretation of the language from the Infrastructure Investment Jobs 
Act (IIJA) permitting provider responses and setting a deadline for the 
Commission to resolve challenges only applies to availability 
challenges and not to Fabric challenges. While some commenters argue 
notice is necessary to provide clarity about the challenges and an 
opportunity to learn the outcomes of their Fabric challenges, we 
conclude that the adoption of these proposals to eliminate notice 
requirements and responses to challenges will clarify any ambiguity in 
the Commission's rules and streamline the process for resolving Fabric 
challenges and incorporating challenge results into the next version of 
the Fabric. On the other hand, implementing a more robust notification 
system and permitting additional time for service providers to respond 
to in-progress Fabric challenges would inherently add more complexity 
to the existing process by which the Commission updates the Fabric on a 
biannual basis and would substantially increase the amount of time it 
takes to resolve Fabric challenges and may impact Fabric data 
generation timelines.
    We also adopt the proposal from the Fourth FNPRM to modify the 
Commission's rules to better distinguish between fixed and Fabric 
challenges by moving the rules pertinent to Fabric challenges into 
their own subsection. Having separate sections explaining the distinct 
challenge processes would improve and clarify the Commission's rules.

G. Report to Congress

    The Commission will send a copy of the Sixth Report and Order, 
including this Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, in a report to 
Congress pursuant to the Congressional Review Act. In addition, the 
Commission will send a copy of the Sixth Report and Order, including 
this Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, to the Chief Counsel for 
the SBA Office of Advocacy and will publish a copy of the Sixth Report 
and Order, and this Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (or summaries 
thereof) in the Federal Register.

List of Subjects in 47 CFR Part 1

    Administrative practice and procedure, Internet, Reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements, Telecommunications.

Federal Communications Commission.
Aleta Bowers,
Federal Register Liaison Officer, Office of the Secretary.

Final Rules

    For the reasons discussed in the preamble, the Federal 
Communications Commission amends 47 CFR part 1 as follows:

[[Page 37836]]

PART 1--PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

0
1. The authority citation for part 1 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  47 U.S.C. chs. 2, 5, 9, 13; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; 47 
U.S.C. 1754, unless otherwise noted.

0
2. Amend Sec.  1.7001 by revising paragraph (d)(4) to read as follows:

Sec.  1.7001  Scope and content of filed reports.

* * * * *
    (d) * * *
    (4) The Commission shall make all decisions regarding non-
disclosure of provider-specific information, except that the Chiefs of 
the Space Bureau, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, Wireline 
Competition Bureau, or Office of Economics and Analytics may release 
provider-specific information to:
* * * * *

0
3. Revise Sec.  1.7003 to read as follows:

Sec.  1.7003  Authority to update FCC Form 477.

    The Space Bureau, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, Wireline 
Competition Bureau, and Office of Economics and Analytics may update 
the specific content of data to be submitted on FCC Form 477 as 
necessary to reflect changes over time in transmission technologies, 
spectrum usage, Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and other data 
storage and processing functionalities, and other related matters; and 
may implement any technical improvements or other clarifications to the 
filing mechanism and forms.

0
4. Amend Sec.  1.7005 by removing paragraphs (e)(1) through (3) and 
revising paragraph (e) to read as follows:

Sec.  1.7005  Scope and content of filed reports.

* * * * *
    (e) The Commission shall release provider-specific broadband 
availability data in Broadband Data Collection filings to the public, 
and providers may not request confidential treatment of such 
information.

0
5. Amend Sec.  1.7006 by removing and reserving paragraphs (d)(1)(vii) 
and (9) and adding paragraph (g) to read as follows:

Sec.  1.7006  Data verification.

* * * * *
    (g) Fabric challenge process. State, local, and Tribal governmental 
entities, consumers, and other entities or individuals may submit data 
in an online portal to challenge the accuracy of the Fabric. 
Challengers must provide in their submissions:
    (1) Name and contact information (e.g., address, phone number, 
email);
    (2) The street address or geographic coordinates (latitude/
longitude) of the location(s) at which the Fabric is being challenged;
    (3) Category of dispute, selected from pre-established options on 
the portal;
    (4) Details and evidence about the disputed Fabric location;
    (5) A certification from an individual or an authorized officer or 
signatory of a challenger that the person examined the information 
contained in the challenge and that, to the best of the person's actual 
knowledge, information, and belief, all statements of fact contained in 
the challenge are true and correct.

0
6. Amend Sec.  1.7009 by revising paragraph (d) and adding paragraph 
(e) to read as follows:

Sec.  1.7009  Enforcement.

* * * * *
    (d) Providers must file corrected data when they discover 
inaccuracy, omission, or significant reporting error in the original 
data that they submitted, whether through self-discovery, the 
crowdsource process, the challenge process, or otherwise (which does 
not include audits and verifications, which are specifically addressed 
in Sec.  1.7009(e)).
    (1) Providers must file corrections within 30 days of their 
discovery of incorrect or incomplete data;
    (2) The corrected filings must be accompanied by the same types of 
certifications that accompany the original filings as set forth in 
Sec.  1.7004(d);
    (e) For adverse audit or verification findings, the Commission 
shall modify or remove some or all of the provider's location or area 
data from the National Broadband Map as needed to effectuate the 
adverse audit or verification findings after the provider is notified 
of an adverse audit or verification finding concerning such location or 
area data.

0
7. Revise Sec.  1.7010 to read as follows:

Sec.  1.7010  Authority to update the Broadband Data Collection.

    The Space Bureau, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, Wireline 
Competition Bureau, and Office of Economics and Analytics may update 
the specific format of data to be submitted pursuant to the Broadband 
Data Collection to reflect changes over time in Geographical 
Information Systems (GIS) and other data storage and processing 
functionalities and may implement any technical improvements or other 
clarifications to the filing mechanism and forms.

[FR Doc. 2026-12766 Filed 6-23-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6712-01-P