[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 121 (Thursday, June 25, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 38304-38309]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12778]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 74

[MB Docket No. 26-20; FCC 26-37; FR ID 351626]

FCC Adopts Application Limit and Eligibility Restrictions for New 
NCE Reserved Band FM Translator Station Applications in Upcoming 2026 
Filing Window

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC 
or Commission) adopts eligibility restrictions and a limit on the 
number of applications that each applicant may file in the upcoming 
2026 filing window for applications for new noncommercial educational 
(NCE) reserved band FM translator station construction permits.

DATES: Effective July 27, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: James Bradshaw, 
  [email&#160;protected]  ; Joseph Cohen,   [email&#160;protected]  ; Lisa 
Scanlan,   [email&#160;protected]  ; or Amy Van de Kerckhove, 
  [email&#160;protected]  , of the Media Bureau, Audio Division, (202) 
418-2700.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's 
document, (Public Notice), in MB Docket No. 26-20, FCC 26-37, adopted 
on May 26, 2026, and released on May 28, 2026. The full text of this 
document is available at the following internet address:  https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-37A1.pdf  or the Commission's 
ECFS web page at  https://www.fcc.gov/ecfs . Alternative formats are 
available for people with disabilities (Braille, large print, 
electronic files, audio format) by sending an email to   [email&#160;protected]   
or calling the Commission's Consumer and Government Affairs Bureau at 
(202) 418-0503.
    Regulatory Flexibility Act. The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, 
as amended (RFA), requires that an agency prepare a regulatory 
flexibility analysis for notice and comment rulemakings, unless the 
agency certifies that ``the rule

[[Page 38305]]

will not, if promulgated, have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities.'' Accordingly, the Commission has 
prepared a Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) concerning the 
possible impact of the rule and policy changes contained in this Public 
Notice on small entities. The FRFA is set forth in Appendix B of the 
Public Notice.
    Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 Analysis. This document contains no 
new or modified information collection requirements.
    Congressional Review Act. The Commission has determined, and the 
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, 
Office of Management and Budget, concurs, that this rule is ``non-
major'' under the Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The 
Commission will send a copy of the Public Notice to Congress and the 
Government Accountability Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

Synopsis

    1. The Commission recently directed the Media Bureau (Bureau) to 
open the first-ever filing window for applications for new 
noncommercial educational (NCE) reserved band FM translator station 
construction permits and sought comment on establishing eligibility 
restrictions and a limit on the number of applications that each 
applicant may file in the upcoming window. This document adopts the 
proposed general ten-application cap and the requirement that each 
applicant be the licensee or permittee of an existing NCE FM station, a 
noncommercial AM radio broadcast station, or an LPFM station (primary 
station), which the proposed FM translator will rebroadcast.

Background

    2. The Commission has employed application caps or eligibility 
restrictions in prior reserved band full service NCE FM windows and 
non-reserved band FM translator windows to promote efficiency, curb 
speculative applications, and expedite the processing of applications 
and expansion of new service while preserving spectrum and future 
licensing opportunities. Specifically, in the NCE context, the 
Commission has established by public notice a limit on the number of 
NCE applications filed by an applicant in a filing window. In both 2007 
and 2021, before the full service NCE FM station filing windows opened, 
the Commission sought comment on an application cap and subsequently 
established a limit of ten NCE FM new station applications filed by an 
applicant during each filing window. In each window, this application 
limit helped restrict the number of mutually exclusive applications, 
and allowed the Commission to expeditiously process and grant thousands 
of applications to a wide range of local and diverse applicants, 
therefore promoting the rapid expansion of new NCE FM service 
throughout the country.
    3. The Commission has also imposed eligibility restrictions and 
limits in prior FM translator filing windows to be consistent with the 
mandates of section 5 of the Local Community Radio Act of 2010 (LCRA), 
which require the Commission to ensure that licensing opportunities are 
available for all secondary services and that translator licensing 
procedures do not foreclose or unduly limit future LPFM licensing. The 
restrictions and procedures adopted for prior FM translator filing 
windows, including Auction 99 and Auction 100, were designed to strike 
a balance between the stated goals of the specific proceeding and the 
overall goal of preserving spectrum for secondary services.
    4. In the recent Cap Comment Notice, 91 FR 9528 (Feb. 26, 2026), 
the Commission tentatively concluded that it should also establish 
eligibility restrictions and an application cap for the upcoming NCE 
reserved band FM translator filing window. Specifically, consistent 
with the Commission's mandate under section 5 of the LCRA and to 
promote efficiency in this window, the Commission tentatively concluded 
that a general ten-application cap is a reasonable limit. Further, in 
accordance with the LPFM cross-ownership restrictions contained in 
Sec.  73.860 of the Commission's rules, the Commission tentatively 
proposed to separately impose a four-application cap for Tribal LPFM 
applicants and a two-application cap for all other LPFM applicants. 
Finally, in order to further constrain speculative applications and to 
ensure this window provides additional flexibility to existing 
broadcasters, the Commission tentatively concluded that imposing a 
requirement that each applicant be the licensee or permittee of an 
existing NCE FM or noncommercial AM radio broadcast station or LPFM 
station (primary station), which the proposed FM translator will 
rebroadcast, will further these goals. The Commission received several 
comments, replies, and ex parte filings in response to the Cap Comment 
Notice. Although the commenters uniformly agree that some limits are 
advisable, they are not in agreement on what specific cap and 
restrictions would be most appropriate and beneficial.

Discussion

    5. Application Limit. The Commission adopts its proposal from the 
Cap Comment Notice to establish a general limit of ten applications per 
applicant in the upcoming window for new NCE reserved band FM 
translator station construction permits. The Commission finds that a 
ten-application cap, which was supported by the vast majority of the 
commenters addressing the limit, will best provide interested parties 
with a meaningful opportunity to file for and obtain new NCE reserved 
band FM translator licenses, while still preserving spectrum for future 
secondary services, consistent with the LCRA, deter speculative filings 
and procedural delays, and permit the expeditious processing of 
applications filed in the window. Moreover, the ten-application cap, 
employed in both the 2007 and 2021 NCE FM filing windows, has proven in 
practice to be very effective. Specifically, in these windows, the ten-
application limit helped restrict the number of mutually exclusive 
applications, discouraged mass filings by speculators, and facilitated 
the expeditious processing and grant of thousands of applications to a 
vast range of legitimate local and diverse applicants.
    6. The Commission concludes that a higher application limit of 30 
applications, as recommended by Magrill and Cedar Cove, would not serve 
its goals as well as the ten-application cap the Commission adopts 
herein, as the potential benefits to a few applicants would be 
outweighed by the harm to all applicants from additional complications 
and processing delays. The Commission acknowledges Magrill and Cedar 
Cove's laudable claims that a higher cap could potentially increase 
service to underserved, small communities and rural areas. The 
Commission finds, however, that these proposals for an increased cap, 
which were not endorsed by any other commenters, and opposed by REC and 
LPFM-AG, have the significant drawback of increasing the potential for 
more and larger MX groups, which could lead to processing delays and 
inhibit the expeditious initiation of new service to the public. The 
Commission also finds that implementing either Magrill's or Cedar 
Cove's 30-application cap tiered approach would be cumbersome, create 
logistical and administrative challenges, and thus further complicate 
and delay processing and initiation of new NCE reserved band FM 
translator service.

[[Page 38306]]

    7. Finally, in accordance with the Sec.  73.860 LPFM cross-
ownership restrictions, the Commission adopts its proposal to 
separately impose a four-application cap for Tribal LPFM applicants and 
a two-application cap for all other LPFM applicants. The Commission 
finds that Cedar Cove's recommendation to limit all LPFM applicants to 
one application in the window will unnecessarily curtail an LPFM 
applicant's ability to identify a usable reserved band channel and 
expand its service, while LPFM-AG's proposed higher cap of four 
applications for all LPFM applicants, and Schober's proposal of 
unlimited applications for all Tribal LPFM applicants, are logistically 
complicated, unfair to full service applicants, and contrary to the 
Commission's well established LPFM ownership restrictions.
    8. Eligibility Restrictions. The Commission adopts its proposal 
from the Cap Comment Notice, supported by numerous commenters, to 
require that each applicant be the licensee or permittee of an existing 
NCE FM or noncommercial AM radio broadcast station or LPFM station 
(primary station), which the proposed FM translator will rebroadcast. 
The Commission agrees with REC and K-LOVE/HMG that this eligibility 
restriction is ``necessary to prevent abuse,'' will ensure 
``opportunities for applicants will be fair,'' and will constrain 
gamesmanship and speculative applications. As NRB emphasizes, ``[t]ying 
translator authorizations to a primary station provides a clear and 
workable standard that aligns with the Commission's longstanding 
commitment to localism and community service. It ensures that spectrum 
is allocated to broadcasters with an established record of serving 
their listeners, rather than to entities seeking to acquire spectrum 
for speculative purposes.'' In contrast, de Caro's proposal to extend 
participation to applicants who are not currently authorized permittees 
or licensees would defeat this goal.
    9. The Commission agrees with commenters that this eligibility 
restriction would be ineffectual without a holding period. As REC and 
LPFM-AG explain, there ``needs to be a safeguard in place'' to prevent 
speculation and gamesmanship, such as ``immediate flipping, paper 
reshuffling of primaries, or rapid untethering of translators shortly 
after grant or license.'' While LPFM-AG recommends a one-year holding 
period, and Schober proposes a permanent holding period, the Commission 
finds REC's suggested four-year period strikes the correct balance and 
is sufficient to deter license speculators, while not unduly burdening 
the licensee. Moreover, similar four-year holding periods have been 
effective in preventing gamesmanship in the NCE FM full service context 
and prior FM translator filing windows. Accordingly, from the time that 
the Commission grants a construction permit in the upcoming filing 
window until the time when the facility has achieved four years of on-
air operations rebroadcasting the primary station identified on the 
authorization, the permittee/licensee (1) must maintain, and cannot 
change, the primary station to be rebroadcast by the FM translator, and 
(2) cannot assign or transfer its FM translator authorization to a 
different entity unless it is in conjunction with the assignment or 
transfer of the primary station to that same entity.
    10. Finally, the Commission finds additional eligibility 
restrictions are unnecessary to achieve the Commission's goals of 
giving legitimate interested parties the opportunity to apply for NCE 
reserved band FM translator outlets, while still preserving secondary 
service spectrum, curbing abuse, and promoting efficiency. The 
Commission declines to adopt EIC's suggested restrictions based on 
existing authorizations and income, a proposal adamantly opposed by 
several commenters. The Commission agrees with these commenters that 
EIC's narrow restrictions would be arbitrary, contrary to the public 
interest, and burdensome. Specifically, the Commission finds that a 
restriction based on the number of full power primary stations and FM 
translator stations an applicant holds would unduly penalize and 
exclude established broadcasters and ``preclude the filing of 
applications by the very licensees where the public would be served by 
these new translators.'' Further, a restriction based on annual gross 
income would require the collection of information currently 
unavailable to the Commission, creating delays and an additional burden 
on both applicants and Bureau staff that will not further the 
Commission's goals of this proceeding (i.e., promote efficiency in this 
window, constrain speculative applications, and ensure this window 
provides additional flexibility to existing broadcasters). An income-
based restriction could also, as K-LOVE/HMG notes, potentially 
``dissuade robust participation from licensees as diverse as state 
universities, non-profits, and religious broadcasters with revenue 
streams wholly unrelated to their broadcast business, undermining the 
public interest goals of the filing window.''
    11. Eligibility Restriction and Application Limits. Accordingly, 
after reviewing and considering the comments in this proceeding, the 
Commission adopts and codifies the proposed eligibility restriction and 
application limits: In the 2026 new NCE reserved band FM translator 
station construction permit filing window: (1) each applicant must be 
the licensee or permittee of an existing NCE FM or noncommercial AM 
radio broadcast station or LPFM station (primary station) that the 
proposed FM translator station will rebroadcast; (2) each applicant 
entity may file no more than a total of ten applications nationally, 
except that (i) each Tribal LPFM applicant entity that is subject to 
Sec.  73.860(c) may file no more than a total of four applications 
nationally, and (ii) each other LPFM applicant entity that is subject 
to Sec.  73.860(b) may file no more than a total of two applications 
nationally; and (3) a party to an application may hold attributable 
interests, as defined in Sec.  73.7000, in no more than the maximum 
applications permitted under this rule. If it is determined that any 
applicant entity filed more than the maximum applications permitted 
under this rule, or any party to an application has an attributable 
interest in more than the maximum permitted, the Media Bureau will 
retain the applications that were filed first--based on application 
receipt data--and dismiss all other applications that exceed the limit. 
Each station authorization granted in the 2026 new NCE reserved band FM 
translator station construction permit filing window shall be subject 
to a holding period. From grant of the construction permit until the 
time when the facility has achieved four years of on-air operations 
rebroadcasting the primary station identified on the authorization, the 
permittee/licensee: (1) must maintain, and cannot change, the primary 
station to be rebroadcast by the FM translator, and (2) cannot assign 
or transfer the FM translator authorization to a different entity 
unless it is in conjunction with the assignment or transfer of the 
primary station to that same entity.

Procedural Matters

    12. Regulatory Flexibility Analysis. As required by the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), the Federal Communications 
Commission (Commission) incorporated an Initial Regulatory Flexibility 
Analysis (IRFA) in the FCC Seeks Comment on Proposed Application Limit 
for New

[[Page 38307]]

Noncommercial Educational Reserved Band FM Translator Station 
Applications in Upcoming 2026 Filing Window, Public Notice (Cap Comment 
Notice), released in February 2026. The Commission sought written 
public comment on the proposals in the Cap Comment Notice, including 
comment on the IRFA. No comments were filed addressing the IRFA; 
however, the Commission discusses relevant comments and related 
proposals that may impact small entities below. This Final Regulatory 
Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) conforms to the RFA and it (or summaries 
thereof) will be published in the Federal Register.
    13. Need for, and Objectives of, the Rules. In the document, the 
Commission establishes that in the upcoming 2026 noncommercial 
educational (NCE) reserved band FM translator filing window: (1) each 
applicant must be the licensee or permittee of an existing NCE FM or 
noncommercial AM radio broadcast station or low power FM (LPFM) station 
(primary station) that the proposed FM translator station will 
rebroadcast; (2) each applicant entity may file no more than a total of 
ten applications nationally, except that Tribal LPFM applicants are 
limited to four applications and all other LPFM applicants to two 
applications nationally; and (3) a party to an application may hold 
attributable interests in no more than the maximum applications 
permitted under the Commission's rules (rules). In addition, the 
Commission has determined that, absent eligibility restrictions and a 
limit on the number of applications that an entity may file in the 
filing window described in the document, some applicants may file a 
large number of speculative applications, including applications that 
are mutually exclusive with each other. Accordingly, the Commission has 
determined that a general limit of ten applications for NCE reserved 
band FM translator station construction permits in the filing window, 
as well as imposing a requirement that each applicant be the licensee 
or permittee of an existing NCE FM or noncommercial AM radio broadcast 
station or LPFM station (primary station) that the proposed FM 
translator will rebroadcast, are appropriate procedural safeguards.
    14. The Commission also adopts a holding period for construction 
permits granted in the upcoming filing window, and the subsequent 
licenses, mandating that from grant of the permit until the facility 
has achieved four years of on-air operations rebroadcasting the primary 
station identified on the authorization, the permittee/licensee (1) 
must maintain, and cannot change, the primary station to be rebroadcast 
by the FM translator, and (2) cannot assign or transfer its FM 
translator authorization to a different entity unless it is in 
conjunction with the assignment or transfer of the primary station to 
that same entity.
    15. Lastly, the Commission concludes that an application limit, 
eligibility restrictions, and four-year holding period will deter 
speculation, permit the expeditious processing of the NCE reserved band 
FM translator applications filed in the window, and provide interested 
applicants with a meaningful opportunity to file for and obtain new NCE 
reserved band FM translator station licenses while still preserving 
spectrum for future secondary services. The Commission believes that 
the application limit, eligibility restrictions, and four-year holding 
period will benefit small entities, as defined below.
    16. Summary of Significant Issues Raised by Public Comments in 
Response to the IRFA. In response to the Cap Comment Notice, the 
Commission received comments and replies from broadcast industry 
stakeholders who debated the proposed application limits, eligibility 
restrictions, and related issues. Though no comments were filed 
directly addressing the IRFA, a number of comments were submitted 
regarding proposals that may impact small entities. The majority of 
commenters addressing the application limit endorse the Commission's 
proposed 10-application cap. Kyle Magrill (Magrill) and Cedar Cove 
Broadcasting, Inc. (Cedar Cove) each recommend a larger 30-application 
limit. REC Networks (REC) and Low Power FM Advocacy Group (LPFM-AG) 
each oppose Cedar Cove's proposal. Edward A. Schober (Schober) urges 
the Commission to exempt applicants from the cap ``if all the 
applications, and the principal community of the primary station are 
within the same minor insular outlying area, provided that the 
applicant has no applications outside the minor outlying area. (USVI, 
Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, etc.).''
    17. REC supports the four-application cap for Tribal LPFM 
applicants and two-application cap for all other LPFM applicants 
proposed in the Cap Comment Notice. Cedar Cove recommends that the 
Commission limit all LPFM applicants to only one application in the 
filing window. REC and LPFM-AG each oppose Cedar Cove's proposal. LPFM-
AG conversely argues that the ``the window is too narrow to be 
meaningful for many LPFM applicants,'' and the Commission should 
therefore increase the limit to four applications for all LPFM 
applicants. Prometheus Radio Project agrees with LPFM-AG's 
recommendation to increase the application limit for all LPFM 
applicants. Finally, Schober proposes that the Commission allow 
unlimited translator applications for Tribal and public safety LPFM 
applicants.
    18. Several commenters endorse the Commission's proposal to require 
that each applicant be the licensee or permittee of an existing primary 
station, which the proposed FM translator will rebroadcast. Only one 
commenter, Charles de Caro, opposes the restriction. The Educational 
Information Corporation (EIC) supports the primary station eligibility 
restriction, but advocates for several additional restrictions based on 
the number of existing authorizations and annual gross income. Four 
separate commenters oppose EIC's proposed restrictions.
    19. To prevent speculation and gamesmanship, REC recommends 
imposing a four-year holding period on construction permits granted in 
this filing window. Common Frequency, Inc., supports REC's proposal, 
but recommends that ``in maintaining the primary station rebroadcast 
designation, the Commission should be able to grant narrow waivers in 
the local public interest for certain changes.'' LPFM-AG opposes a 
four-year holding period and instead advocates for a one-year holding 
period to address the risk of ``immediate flipping, paper shuffling of 
primaries, or rapid untethering of translators shortly after grant or 
license.'' Schober recommends a ``permanent freeze'' on assignments and 
primary station changes. The Commission's response to these comments 
and proposals is discussed below. Finally, some commenters request that 
the Commission make material changes to several rules before opening 
the window. These recommendations, irrespective of their merits, fall 
outside the scope of this proceeding, and therefore the Commission will 
not consider them here.
    20. Response to Comments by the Chief Counsel for the Small 
Business Administration Office of Advocacy. Pursuant to the Small 
Business Jobs Act of 2010, which amended the RFA, the Commission is 
required to respond to any comments filed by the Chief Counsel for the 
Small Business Administration (SBA) Office of Advocacy, and also 
provide a detailed statement of any change made to the proposed rules 
as a result of those comments. The Chief Counsel did not

[[Page 38308]]

file any comments in response to the proposed rules in this proceeding.
    21. Description and Estimate of the Number of Small Entities to 
Which the Rules Will Apply. The RFA directs agencies to provide a 
description of, and where feasible, an estimate of the number of small 
entities that may be affected by the adopted rules. The RFA generally 
defines the term ``small entity'' as having the same meaning as the 
terms ``small business,'' ``small organization,'' and ``small 
governmental jurisdiction.'' In addition, the term ``small business'' 
has the same meaning as the term ``small business concern'' under the 
Small Business Act. A ``small business concern'' is one which: (1) is 
independently owned and operated; (2) is not dominant in its field of 
operation; and (3) satisfies any additional criteria established by the 
SBA. The SBA establishes small business size standards that agencies 
are required to use when promulgating regulations relating to small 
businesses; agencies may establish alternative size standards for use 
in such programs, but must consult and obtain approval from SBA before 
doing so.
    22. The Commission's actions, over time, may affect small entities 
that are not easily categorized at present. The Commission therefore 
describes three broad groups of small entities that could be directly 
affected by its actions. In general, a small business is an independent 
business having fewer than 500 employees. These types of small 
businesses represent 99.9% of all businesses in the United States, 
which translates to 34.75 million businesses. Next, ``small 
organizations'' are not-for-profit enterprises that are independently 
owned and operated and not dominant their field. While the Commission 
does not have data regarding the number of non-profits that meet that 
criteria, over 99 percent of nonprofits have fewer than 500 employees. 
Finally, ``small governmental jurisdictions'' are defined as cities, 
counties, towns, townships, villages, school districts, or special 
districts with populations of less than fifty thousand. Based on the 
2022 U.S. Census of Governments data, the Commission estimates that at 
least 48,724 out of 90,835 local government jurisdictions have a 
population of less than 50,000.
    23. The rules adopted in the document will apply to small entities 
in the industries identified in the chart below by their six-digit 
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes and 
corresponding SBA size standard. Where available, the Commission also 
provides additional information regarding the number of potentially 
affected entities in the industries identified below.

                               Table 1--2022 U.S. Census Bureau Data by NAICS Code
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Regulated industry (footnotes specify
 potentially affected entities within a   NAICS code       SBA size      Total firms   Total small     % small
  regulated industry where applicable)                     standard                       firms         firms
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Radio Broadcasting Stations............       516110      $47 million         2,616         2,136         81.65
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                         Table 2--Broadcast Entity Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Broadcast station owners (as of August 8,                     SBA size standard ($47 million)
                    2025)                     ------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------
               Affected entity                    # Commercial licensed      Small firms      (%)Small entities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Radio Stations (AM & FM) Groups..............                      2,881            2,863                 99.38
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    24. Description of Economic Impact and Projected Reporting, 
Recordkeeping, and Other Compliance Requirements for Small Entities. 
The RFA directs agencies to describe the economic impact of adopted 
rules on small entities, as well as projected reporting, recordkeeping, 
and other compliance requirements, including an estimate of the classes 
of small entities which will be subject to the requirement and the type 
of professional skills necessary for preparation of the report or 
record.
    25. The document adopts eligibility restrictions, a four-year 
holding period, and a limit on the number of applications each 
applicant may file in the upcoming filing window. The Commission finds 
that none of the changes adopted in the document will result in an 
increase in the reporting and recordkeeping requirements of broadcast 
stations or applicants for NCE reserved band FM translator 
authorizations. Applicants will be current licensees or permittees of 
an existing NCE FM or noncommercial AM radio broadcast station or LPFM 
station and should be familiar with the Commission's application 
process, thereby reducing the need to hire other professionals to 
comply with this process. Small entity applicants are required to 
comply with application requirements, including submitting no more than 
a total of ten applications nationally. Small Tribal LPFM applicants 
may file no more than four applications nationally, and other LPFM 
applicants subject to Sec.  73.860(b) of the Commission's rules may 
file no more than a total of two applications nationally. In addition, 
applicants may hold attributable interests in no more than the maximum 
applications permitted as defined in Sec.  73.7000 of the Commission's 
rules, and must comply with the four-year holding period as discussed 
above.
    26. Discussion of Steps Taken to Minimize the Significant Economic 
Impact on Small Entities, and Significant Alternatives Considered. The 
RFA requires an agency to provide ``a description of the steps the 
agency has taken to minimize the significant economic impact on small 
entities . . . including a statement of the factual, policy, and legal 
reasons for selecting the alternative adopted in the final rule and why 
each one of the other significant alternatives to the rule considered 
by the agency which affect the impact on small entities was rejected.
    27. As discussed above, commenters offered various alternatives to 
the application caps and eligibility restrictions proposed in the 
document. Regarding the adopted ten-application cap, which was 
supported by the majority of commenters addressing the limit, the 
Commission finds that the 30-application limit proposals by Magrill and 
Cedar Cove would not serve its goals as well as the ten-application 
limit. While the Commission

[[Page 38309]]

acknowledges their laudable claims that a higher cap could increase 
service to underserved and rural areas, these increased cap proposals, 
which were not endorsed by any other commenters and opposed by REC and 
LPFM-AG, have the significant drawback of increasing the potential for 
more and larger mutually exclusive (MX) groups, which could lead to 
processing delays. Implementing a 30-application approach would also 
create administrative challenges, further delaying the initiation of 
new radio service to the public.
    28. The Commission also rejects proposed alternatives to the 
adopted four-application cap for Tribal LPFM applicants and a two-
application cap for all other LPFM applicants. The Commission finds 
that Cedar Cove's recommendation to limit all LPFM applicants to one 
application would unnecessarily restrict an applicant's ability to 
identify a usable reserved-band channel and expand service. 
Furthermore, LPFM-AG's proposed four-application cap for all LPFM 
applicants and Schober's proposal for unlimited applications for all 
Tribal LPFM applicants are logistically complicated, unfair to full-
service applicants, and contrary to the Commission's well-established 
LPFM ownership restrictions.
    29. The Commission also considers additional applicant eligibility 
restrictions in the document, but ultimately adopts the restrictions 
proposed in the Cap Comment Notice. For example, the Commission 
declines to adopt EIC's suggested restrictions based on the number of 
an applicant's existing authorizations and income, which several 
commenters adamantly opposed. The Commission agrees that these narrow 
restrictions would be arbitrary, burdensome, and contrary to the public 
interest.
    30. In the document, the Commission also considers various holding 
period proposals. The Commission agrees with REC and LPFM-AG that there 
``needs to be a safeguard in place'' to prevent speculation and 
gamesmanship and that a temporary restriction on primary station 
changes and assignments/transfers will curb the risk of ``immediate 
flipping, paper reshuffling of primaries, or rapid untethering of 
translators shortly after grant or license.'' The Commission finds that 
REC's four-year holding period proposal strikes the correct balance and 
is sufficient to deter license speculators, while not unduly burdening 
the licensee.
    31. Report to Congress. The Commission will send a copy of the 
document, including this Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, in a 
report to Congress pursuant to the Congressional Review Act. In 
addition, the Commission will send a copy of the document, including 
this Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, to the Chief Counsel for 
the SBA Office of Advocacy and will publish a copy of the document and 
this Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (or summaries thereof) in 
the Federal Register.

List of Subjects in 47 CFR Part 74

    Radio, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

Federal Communications Commission.
Aleta Bowers,
Federal Register Liaison Officer, Office of the Secretary.

Final Rule

    For the reasons discussed in the preamble, the Federal 
Communications Commission amends 47 CFR part 74 as follows:

PART 74--EXPERIMENTAL RADIO, AUXILIARY, SPECIAL BROADCAST AND OTHER 
PROGRAM DISTRIBUTIONAL SERVICES

0
1. The authority citation for part 74 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  47 U.S.C. 154, 302a, 303, 307, 309, 310, 325, 336 
and 554.

0
2. Amend Sec.  74.1233 by adding paragraphs (b)(5) and (6) to read as 
follows:

Sec.  74.1233  Processing FM translator and booster station 
applications.

* * * * *
    (b) * * *
    (5) Eligibility and application limits. In the 2026 new NCE 
reserved band FM translator station construction permit filing window:
    (i) Each applicant must be the licensee or permittee of an existing 
NCE FM or noncommercial AM radio broadcast station or LPFM station 
(primary station) that the proposed FM translator station will 
rebroadcast;
    (ii) Each applicant entity may file no more than a total of ten 
applications nationally, except that
    (A) Each Tribal LPFM applicant entity that is subject to Sec.  
73.860(c) may file no more than a total of four applications 
nationally, and
    (B) each other LPFM applicant entity that is subject to Sec.  
73.860(b) may file no more than a total of two applications nationally; 
and
    (iii) A party to an application may hold attributable interests, as 
defined in Sec.  73.7000, in no more than the maximum applications 
permitted under this rule. If it is determined that any applicant 
entity filed more than the maximum applications permitted under this 
rule, or any party to an application has an attributable interest in 
more than the maximum permitted, the Media Bureau will retain the 
applications that were filed first--based on application receipt data--
and dismiss all other applications that exceed the limit.
    (6) Holding period. Each station authorization granted in the 2026 
new NCE reserved band FM translator station construction permit filing 
window shall be subject to a holding period. From grant of the 
construction permit until the time when the facility has achieved four 
years of on-air operations rebroadcasting the primary station 
identified on the authorization, the permittee/licensee:
    (i) Must maintain, and cannot change, the primary station to be 
rebroadcast by the FM translator; and
    (ii) Cannot assign or transfer the FM translator authorization to a 
different entity unless it is in conjunction with the assignment or 
transfer of the primary station to that same entity.
* * * * *
[FR Doc. 2026-12778 Filed 6-24-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6712-01-P