[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 122 (Friday, June 26, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 38498-38502]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12902]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Food and Drug Administration

21 CFR Part 866

[Docket No. FDA-2026-N-6712]

Medical Devices; Immunology and Microbiology Devices; 
Classification of the SARS-CoV-2 Serology Test

AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.

ACTION: Final amendment; final order.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is classifying the 
SARS-CoV-2 serology test into class II (special controls). The special 
controls that apply to the device type are identified in this order and 
will be part of the codified language for classification of the SARS-
CoV-2 serology test. We are taking this action because we have 
determined that classifying the device into class II will provide a 
reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness of the device. We 
believe this action will also enhance patients' access to beneficial 
innovative devices, in part by reducing regulatory burdens.

DATES: This order is effective June 26, 2026. The classification was 
applicable on May 5, 2023.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Maria Esteve-Gasent, Center for 
Devices and Radiological Health, Food and Drug Administration, 10903 
New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 66, Rm. 3213, Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002, 
301-837-7365,   [email&#160;protected]  .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Background

    Upon request, FDA (the Agency or we) has classified the SARS-CoV-2 
serology test into class II (special controls), which we have 
determined will provide a reasonable assurance of safety and 
effectiveness of the device. In addition, we believe this action will 
enhance patients' access to beneficial innovation, in part by reducing 
regulatory burdens by placing the device into a lower device class than 
the automatic class III assignment.
    The automatic assignment of class III occurs by operation of law 
and without any action by FDA, regardless of the level of risk posed by 
the new device. Any device that was not in commercial distribution 
before May 28, 1976, is automatically classified into, and remains 
within, class III and requires premarket approval unless and until FDA 
takes an action to classify or reclassify the device (21 U.S.C. 
360c(f)(1)). We refer to these devices as ``postamendments devices'' 
because they were not in commercial distribution prior to the date of 
enactment of the Medical Device Amendments of 1976, which amended the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act).
    FDA may take a variety of actions in appropriate circumstances to 
classify or reclassify a device into class I or II. We may issue an 
order finding a new device to be substantially equivalent under section 
513(i) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 360c(i)) to a predicate device that 
does not require premarket approval. We determine whether a new device 
is substantially equivalent to a predicate device by means of the 
procedures for premarket notification under section 510(k) of the FD&C 
Act (21 U.S.C. 360(k)) and part 807 (21 CFR part 807).
    FDA may also classify a device through ``De Novo'' classification, 
a common name for the process authorized under section 513(f)(2) of the 
FD&C Act (see also part 860, subpart D (21 CFR part 860, subpart D)). 
Section 207 of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 
1997 (Pub. L. 105-115) established the first procedure for De Novo 
classification. Section 607 of the Food and Drug Administration Safety 
and Innovation Act (Pub. L. 112-144) modified the De Novo 
classification process by adding a second procedure. A device sponsor 
may utilize either procedure for De Novo classification.
    Under the first procedure, the person submits a premarket 
notification (510(k)) for a device that has not previously been 
classified. After receiving an order from FDA classifying the device 
into class III under section 513(f)(1) of the FD&C Act, the person then 
requests a classification under section 513(f)(2).
    Under the second procedure, rather than first submitting a 510(k) 
and then a request for classification, if the person determines that 
there is no legally marketed device upon which to base a determination 
of substantial equivalence, that person requests a classification under 
section 513(f)(2) of the FD&C Act.
    Under either procedure for De Novo classification, FDA is required 
to classify the device by written order within 120 days. The 
classification will be according to the criteria under section 
513(a)(1) of the FD&C Act. Although the device was automatically placed 
within class III, the De Novo classification is considered to be the 
initial classification of the device.
    We believe this De Novo classification will enhance patients' 
access to beneficial innovation, in part by reducing regulatory 
burdens. When FDA classifies a device into class I or II via the De 
Novo process, the device can serve as a predicate for future devices of 
that type, including for 510(k)s (see section 513(f)(2)(B)(i) of the 
FD&C Act). As a result, other device sponsors do not have to submit a 
De Novo request or premarket approval application to market a 
substantially equivalent device (see section 513(i) of the FD&C Act, 
defining ``substantial equivalence''). Instead, sponsors can use the 
less burdensome 510(k) process, when necessary, to market their device.

II. De Novo Classification

    On September 20, 2021, FDA received Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics, 
Inc.'s request for De Novo classification of the VITROS 
Immunodiagnostic Products Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG Reagent Pack and 
Calibrator. On September 21, 2021, FDA received Ortho-Clinical 
Diagnostics, Inc.'s request for De Novo classification of the VITROS 
Immunodiagnostic Products Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Total Reagent Pack and 
Calibrator. FDA reviewed both requests in order to classify the devices 
under the criteria for classification set forth in section 513(a)(1) of 
the FD&C Act.
    We classify devices into class II if general controls by themselves 
are insufficient to provide reasonable assurance of safety and 
effectiveness of

[[Page 38499]]

the device, but there is sufficient information to establish special 
controls that, in combination with the general controls, provide 
reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the device for 
its intended use (see section 513(a)(1)(B) of the FD&C Act). After 
review of the information submitted in the request, we determined that 
the devices can be classified into class II with the establishment of 
special controls. FDA has determined that these special controls, in 
addition to the general controls, will provide reasonable assurance of 
the safety and effectiveness of the devices.
    Therefore, on May 5, 2023, FDA issued an order to the requester 
classifying the devices into class II. In this final order, FDA is 
codifying the classification of the devices by adding 21 CFR 
866.3983.\1\ We have named the generic type of device ``SARS-CoV-2 
serology test,'' and it is identified as a prescription in vitro 
diagnostic device for the detection of specific binding antibodies to 
SARS-CoV-2 in clinical specimens. The detection of SARS-CoV-2 
antibodies is intended to aid in identifying individuals with an 
adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2. The test is not intended for 
the diagnosis of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection, nor screening blood, 
plasma, cells, or tissue donors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ FDA notes that the ``ACTION'' caption for this final order 
is styled as ``Final amendment; final order,'' rather than ``Final 
order.'' Beginning in December 2019, this editorial change was made 
to indicate that the document ``amends'' the Code of Federal 
Regulations. The change was made in accordance with the Office of 
Federal Register's (OFR) interpretations of the Federal Register Act 
(44 U.S.C. chapter 15), its implementing regulations (1 CFR 5.9 and 
parts 21 and 22), and the Document Drafting Handbook.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    FDA has identified the risks to health associated with this type of 
device and the measures required to mitigate these risks in table 1.

Table 1--Risks to Health and Mitigation Measures for SARS-CoV-2 Serology
                                  Tests
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Identified risks to health              Mitigation measures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Risk of false test results.............  Certain labeling information
                                          including limitations, device
                                          descriptions, explanations of
                                          procedures and performance
                                          information identified in
                                          special controls (1), (3), and
                                          (5).
                                         Use of certain specimen
                                          collection devices identified
                                          in special control (2).
                                         Certain design verification and
                                          validation including
                                          documentation of device
                                          descriptions, certain
                                          analytical studies and
                                          clinical studies, and risk
                                          analysis strategies identified
                                          in special control (4).
                                         Testing of characterized
                                          samples and labeling
                                          information identified in
                                          special control (6).
Failure to correctly interpret the test  Certain labeling information
 results.                                 including limitations, device
                                          descriptions, explanations of
                                          procedures and performance
                                          information identified in
                                          special controls (1), (3), and
                                          (5).
                                         Use of certain specimen
                                          collection devices identified
                                          in special control (2).
                                         Certain design verification and
                                          validation including
                                          documentation of device
                                          descriptions, certain
                                          analytical studies and
                                          clinical studies, and risk
                                          analysis strategies identified
                                          in special control (4).
                                         Testing of characterized
                                          samples and labeling
                                          information identified in
                                          special control (6).
Failure to correctly operate the device  Certain labeling information
                                          including limitations, device
                                          descriptions, explanations of
                                          procedures and performance
                                          information identified in
                                          special controls (1), (3), and
                                          (5).
                                         Use of certain specimen
                                          collection devices identified
                                          in special control (2).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    FDA has determined that special controls, in combination with the 
general controls, address these risks to health and provide reasonable 
assurance of safety and effectiveness of the device. For a device to 
fall within this classification, and thus avoid automatic 
classification in class III, it would have to comply with the special 
controls named in this final order. The necessary special controls 
appear in the regulation codified by this final order.
    At the time of classification, SARS-CoV-2 serology tests are for 
prescription use only. Therefore, these devices are subject to the 
prescription labeling requirements for in vitro diagnostic (IVD) 
products (see 21 CFR 809.10(a)(4) and (b)(5)(ii)).
    Under the FD&C Act, submission of a premarket notification under 
section 510(k) is required to reasonably assure the safety and 
effectiveness of class II devices unless FDA determines that the device 
type should be exempt under section 510(m) of the FD&C Act. At this 
time FDA has not made this determination for SARS-CoV-2 serology tests. 
This device is therefore subject to premarket notification requirements 
under section 510(k) of the FD&C Act.

III. Analysis of Environmental Impact

    The Agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.34(b) that this action is 
of a type that does not normally have a significant effect on the human 
environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessment nor an 
environmental impact statement is required.

IV. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995

    This final order establishes special controls that refer to 
previously approved collections of information found in other FDA 
regulations and guidance. These collections of information are subject 
to review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501-3521). The collections 
of information in part 860, subpart D, regarding De Novo classification 
have been approved under OMB control number 0910-0844; the collections 
of information in 21 CFR part 814, subparts A through E, regarding 
premarket approval have been approved under OMB control number 0910-
0231; the collections of information in part 807, subpart E, regarding 
premarket notification

[[Page 38500]]

submissions have been approved under OMB control number 0910-0120; the 
collections of information in 21 CFR part 820 regarding quality 
management system regulation have been approved under OMB control 
number 0910-0073; and the collections of information in 21 CFR parts 
801 and 809 regarding labeling have been approved under OMB control 
number 0910-0485.

List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 866

    Biologics, Laboratories, Medical devices.

    Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under 
authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, 21 CFR part 
866 is amended as follows:

PART 866--IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY DEVICES

0
1. The authority citation for part 866 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: 21 U.S.C. 351, 360, 360c, 360e, 360j, 360l, 371.

0
2. Add Sec.  866.3983 to subpart D to read as follows:

Sec.  866.3983   SARS-CoV-2 serology test.

    (a) Identification. A SARS-CoV-2 serology test is a prescription in 
vitro diagnostic device for the detection of specific binding 
antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in clinical specimens. The detection of SARS-
CoV-2 antibodies is intended to aid in identifying individuals with an 
adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2. The test is not intended for 
the diagnosis of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection, nor screening blood, 
plasma, cells, or tissue donors.
    (b) Classification. Class II (special controls). The special 
controls for this device are:
    (1) The intended use in the labeling required under Sec.  809.10 of 
this chapter must include a description of the following: Analytes the 
device detects, the specimen types tested, the results provided to the 
end user, the clinical indications for which the test is to be used, 
the specific intended population(s), the intended use locations 
including testing location(s) where the device is to be used (if 
applicable), and other conditions of use, as appropriate.
    (2) If sample collection devices are used, any sample collection 
device used must be FDA-cleared, -approved, or -classified as 510(k) 
exempt (standalone or as part of a test system) for the collection of 
specimen types claimed by this device; alternatively, the sample 
collection device must be cleared in a premarket submission as a part 
of this device.
    (3) The labeling required under Sec.  809.10(b) of this chapter 
must include:
    (i) A detailed device description, including reagents, instruments, 
ancillary materials, all control elements, and a detailed explanation 
of the methodology, including all pre-analytical methods for processing 
of specimens;
    (ii) Detailed descriptions of the performance characteristics of 
the device for each specimen type claimed in the intended use based on 
analytical studies, including the following, as applicable: Assay 
cutoff or limit of detection expressed in international standard units, 
inclusivity, cross-reactivity, interfering substances, competitive 
inhibition, carryover and cross contamination, matrix equivalency, hook 
effect, specimen stability, precision, reproducibility, and clinical 
studies, including the time period in which the clinical performance 
was established and the variant(s) prevalent in the United States at 
the time of performance validation;
    (iii) Detailed descriptions of the test procedure(s), the 
interpretation of test results for clinical specimens, and acceptance 
criteria for any quality control testing;
    (iv) When applicable, performance results of the analytical study 
testing of a standardized reference material that FDA has determined is 
appropriate;
    (v) Limiting statements that indicate:
    (A) A negative test result does not preclude the possibility of 
infection;
    (B) A negative result can occur if the quantity of the anti-SARS-
CoV-2 antibodies present in the specimen is below the detection limits 
of the assay, or the antibodies that are detected are not present 
during the stage of disease in which a sample is collected;
    (C) There is a risk of erroneous results (i.e., negative results) 
due to the presence of novel emerging viral variants circulating in the 
intended use population;
    (D) The performance characteristics for that analyte were 
established when [insert predominant strain, subtype, or variant] was 
prevalent and that due to the propensity of the virus to mutate, new 
strains emerge over time which may affect the performance of this 
device and have serious public health implications;
    (E) The test results should be interpreted in conjunction with 
other clinical and laboratory data available to the healthcare provider 
(as applicable);
    (F) Positive and negative predictive values are highly dependent on 
prevalence;
    (G) Accurate results are dependent on adequate specimen collection, 
transport, storage, and processing (as applicable). Failure to observe 
proper procedures in any one of these steps can lead to incorrect 
results;
    (H) The test is not intended for donor screening; and
    (I) The test is not intended to diagnose acute SARS-CoV-2 
infection. An assay that directly detects the virus should be used to 
evaluate individuals for acute COVID-19, particularly those who have 
been in contact with the virus.
    (vi) For devices intended for the quantitative detection of SARS-
CoV-2 antibodies, labeling must include a prominent statement that 
includes the following: the test calibrators' traceability to a 
standardized reference material that FDA has determined is appropriate 
and the limit of blank, limit of detection, and limit of quantitation, 
with the defined analytical measuring interval.
    (4) Design verification and validation must include:
    (i) Detailed documentation of performance from a multisite clinical 
study with an appropriate number of clinical samples (i.e., be 
appropriately statistically powered) from individuals with recent or 
prior SARS CoV-2 infection in which the results are compared to results 
obtained from a comparator that FDA has determined to be appropriate. 
This study must be conducted in the appropriate laboratory setting to 
demonstrate clinical performance. For any SARS-CoV-2 serology test 
intended for use in near-patient settings, a separate clinical study 
must be conducted in near-patient settings. Documentation from these 
studies must include study reports with study description, testing 
results, and all statistical analyses, including an appropriate 
justification describing how the sample set is representative of the 
intended use population. These studies must compare the device 
performance to results obtained from a comparator that FDA has 
determined to be appropriate. These clinical studies must include 
testing of unique prospective samples from subjects that are 
representative of the intended use populations and may, when determined 
to be acceptable by FDA, include additional characterized clinical 
samples; or, as an alternative, when determined to be acceptable by 
FDA, an equivalent sample set;
    (ii) For any SARS-CoV-2 antibody test intended for use in near-
patient settings, detailed documentation that demonstrates the 
effectiveness of risk control measures and device robustness, including 
flex studies, and performance with weakly-reactive samples when used by 
the intended operators;

[[Page 38501]]

    (iii) Risk analysis and documentation demonstrating how risk 
control measures are implemented to address device system hazards, such 
as failure modes effects analysis and hazard analysis. This 
documentation must include a detailed description of a protocol 
(including all procedures and methods) for the continuous monitoring, 
identification, and handling of genetic mutations and/or novel 
respiratory pathogen isolates or strains (e.g., regular review of 
published literature and periodic in silico analysis of target amino 
acid sequence(s) to detect possible mismatches) that may affect 
detection of antibody. All results of this protocol, including any 
findings, must be documented and must include any additional data 
analysis that is requested by FDA in response to any performance 
concerns identified under this section or identified by FDA during 
routine evaluation. Additionally, if requested by FDA, these 
evaluations must be submitted to FDA within 48 hours of the request for 
FDA review, and any results that are reasonably interpreted to support 
the conclusion that novel respiratory pathogen strains or isolates 
impact the stated expected performance of the device must be sent to 
FDA immediately to the email address provided in FDA's request;
    (iv) Documentation of the specific amino acid sequence of the SARS-
CoV-2 target protein(s) that the device utilizes to detect specific 
antibodies to SARS-CoV-2;
    (v) A detailed device description, including device components, 
ancillary reagents required but not provided, and a detailed 
explanation of the methodology, including protein sequence target(s) 
for each analyte, design of target detection reagents, internal and 
external controls, and computational path from collected raw data to 
reported result (e.g., how collected raw signals are converted into a 
reported signal and result), as applicable to the detection method and 
device design;
    (vi) For devices with associated software or instrumentation, 
documentation must include a detailed description of device software, 
including software applications and hardware-based devices that 
incorporate software. The detailed description must include 
documentation of verification, validation, and hazard analysis and risk 
assessment activities, including an assessment of the impact of threats 
and vulnerabilities on device functionality and end users and patients 
as part of cybersecurity review;
    (vii) For devices intended for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 
antibodies for which a standardized reference material (that FDA has 
determined is appropriate) is available, the performance results of an 
analytical study testing this standardized reference material. Detailed 
documentation of that study and its results must be provided, including 
the study protocol, study report, testing results, and all statistical 
analyses;
    (viii) Detailed documentation of analytical studies conducted as 
appropriate to the technology, specimen types tested, and intended use 
of the device, including precision, endogenous interferences, cross 
reactivity, carryover, matrix equivalency, class specificity, hook 
effect, and sample and reagent stability. Samples selected for use in 
analytical studies or used to prepare contrived samples for use in 
analytical studies must be from subjects with clinically relevant 
circulating antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in the United States. Cross-
reactivity studies must include samples from SARS-CoV-2 antibody 
negative subjects with antibodies to viruses, high prevalence disease 
agents, and normal or pathogenic flora. Endogenous interference studies 
must include SARS-CoV-2 antibody negative and low positive samples with 
endogenous interference substances, including antibodies present in 
autoimmune diseases that are reasonably likely to be encountered in 
clinical specimens under actual use conditions. In addition, for 
devices intended for the quantitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 
antibodies, the information provided must also include the metrological 
calibration traceability hierarchy to a standardized reference material 
that FDA has determined is appropriate. As appropriate to the 
technology and specimen types tested, the information provided to 
support quantitative tests must also include studies to support the 
analytical measuring interval, including a limit of blank study, a 
limit of detection study, an upper and lower limits of quantitation 
study, a precision study, and a linearity study using clinical samples, 
and, using a standardized reference material that FDA has determined is 
appropriate, an accuracy study;
    (ix) Detailed documentation of data and protocols, including 
acceptance criteria, from a real-time reagent stability study must 
include testing of samples with adequately challenging analyte 
concentrations and must include shelf-life stability and shipping 
stability, and, as applicable, in-use and open-kit stability and 
freeze-thaw stability. The shelf-life stability assessment must include 
a minimum of three lots;
    (x) Detailed documentation of a multisite reproducibility study 
with testing conducted at a minimum of three sites;
    (xi) Final release criteria to be used for manufactured test lots 
with appropriate evidence that lots released at the extremes of the 
specifications will meet the claimed analytical and clinical 
performance characteristics as well as the stability claims; and
    (xii) Lot-to-lot precision studies, as appropriate.
    (5) For any SARS-CoV-2 antibody test intended for use in near-
patient settings, labeling must also include a brief reference sheet 
(quick reference instructions) for the intended user(s) that includes, 
at a minimum, the name and intended use of the test, easy to follow 
step-by-step instructions of all control and sample testing procedures 
for the claimed sample types, including graphic illustrations targeted 
towards lay users (as applicable), the result(s) interpretation 
guidance, warnings and limitation statements, toxicology information 
and safety considerations for any hazardous materials, information for 
troubleshooting (e.g., frequently asked questions), and technical 
assistance with the device (e.g., helpline contact information).
    (6) If one of the actions listed in section 564(b)(1)(A) through 
(D) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act occurs with respect to 
one or more of the analytes claimed in the intended use, or if the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services determines, under section 319(a) 
of the Public Health Service Act, that a disease or disorder presents a 
public health emergency, or that a public health emergency otherwise 
exists, with respect to one or more of the analytes claimed in the 
intended use:
    (i) Within 30 days from the date that FDA notifies manufacturers 
that characterized samples are available for test evaluation, the 
manufacturer must have testing performed on the device with those 
samples in accordance with a standardized protocol considered and 
determined by FDA to be acceptable and appropriate; and
    (ii) Within 60 days from the date that FDA notifies manufacturers 
that characterized samples are available for test evaluation and 
continuing until 3 years from that date, the results of the emergency 
analytical reactivity testing, including the detailed information for 
the samples tested as described in the certificate of authentication, 
must be

[[Page 38502]]

included as part of the device's labeling in a tabular format.

Grace R. Graham,
Deputy Commissioner for Policy, Legislation, and International Affairs.
[FR Doc. 2026-12902 Filed 6-25-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4164-01-P