[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 121 (Thursday, June 25, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 38309-38314]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12839]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

50 CFR Part 679

[Docket No.: 260622-0149]
RIN 0648-BL49

Fisheries of the Exclusive Economic Zone off Alaska; Modify the 
Timing of Haul Designation for Trawl Catcher Processors in the Gulf of 
Alaska and Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands Groundfish Fisheries

AGENCY: National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Commerce.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: NMFS issues this final rule to standardize the time limit in 
which trawl catcher/processors (C/Ps) participating in the groundfish 
fisheries in the Gulf of Alaska Management Area (GOA) and the Bering 
Sea and Aleutian Islands Management Area (BSAI) must assign each haul 
to a management program. This action is necessary to improve 
consistency with respect to when trawl C/Ps are required to assign a 
haul to a specific management

[[Page 38310]]

program in a logbook. It allows additional time for vessel operators 
participating in the Western Alaska Community Development Quota (CDQ) 
and non-CDQ fisheries on the same trip to determine which management 
program to assign a haul to. This rule is intended to promote the goals 
and objectives of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and 
Management Act (Magnuson-Stevens Act), the Fishery Management Plans 
(FMPs) for Groundfish of the GOA and BSAI Management Areas, and other 
applicable laws.

DATES: This rule is effective on July 27, 2026.

ADDRESSES: Electronic copies of the Regulatory Impact Review (referred 
to as the ``Analysis'') and Categorical Exclusion (CE) prepared for 
this final rule may be obtained from  https://www.regulations.gov .
    Written comments regarding the burden-hour estimates or other 
aspects of the collection-of-information requirements contained in this 
rule may be submitted to NMFS Alaska Region, P.O. Box 21668, Juneau, AK 
99802-1668, Attn: Gretchen Harrington and to  https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/PRAMain . Find this particular information collection by using 
the search function.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Caleb Taylor,   [email&#160;protected]  , 
907-586-7228.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This final rule is a change to reporting 
requirements that revises and standardizes the time limit for all trawl 
C/Ps to assign each haul to a management program in the logbook. NMFS 
published a proposed rule in the Federal Register on October 2, 2025 
(90 FR 47716). The comment period on the proposed rule ended on 
November 3, 2025. NMFS received six comment letters and considered all 
comments submitted on or before November 3, 2025 in the development of 
this rule. A summary of the comments and NMFS's responses are provided 
in the Comments and Responses section of the preamble. All public 
comment letters submitted during the comment period may be obtained at: 
 https://www.regulations.gov/document/NOAA-NMFS-2024-0154-0003 . A 
detailed review of the rationale for these regulations is provided in 
the preamble to the proposed rule (90 FR 47716).

Authority for Action

    NMFS manages the groundfish fisheries in the exclusive economic 
zone under the GOA FMP and under the BSAI FMP. The North Pacific 
Fishery Management Council (Council) prepared and recommended these 
FMPs under the authority of the Magnuson-Stevens Act, 16 U.S.C. 1801 et 
seq. Regulations governing U.S. fisheries and implementing the FMPs for 
groundfish of the GOA and BSAI appear at 50 CFR parts 600 and 679. This 
action is implemented under Magnuson-Stevens Act section 305(d) and is 
necessary to carry out section 3.9.1 of both the BSAI FMP and GOA FMP, 
which describe the Council's recommended approach to recordkeeping and 
reporting requirements. Section 3.9.1 of the BSAI FMP requires C/P 
vessel operators to submit certain information within a time period 
specified in regulations and authorizes NMFS, in consultation with the 
Council, to establish such recordkeeping and reporting regulations that 
are necessary and appropriate to determine catch, production, effort, 
price, and other information necessary for conservation and management 
of the fisheries. Under the FMPs, NMFS may amend these regulations as 
necessary to accomplish the goals and objectives of the recordkeeping 
and reporting provisions. On April 8, 2019, the Council recommended the 
regulatory provisions that this action implements. This action modifies 
recordkeeping and reporting requirements that are necessary to 
attribute catch to specific fishery management programs implemented 
under the BSAI and GOA FMPs.

Background

    In 2024, 30 trawl C/Ps fished for groundfish in the exclusive 
economic zone off Alaska, participating in the Amendment 80 Program, 
American Fisheries Act (AFA) Program, Central GOA Rockfish Program 
(Rockfish Program), Aleutian Islands Pollock (AIP) Program, open access 
fisheries, and the CDQ Program. This rule applies to all trawl C/P 
fishing activity under the GOA and BSAI groundfish FMPs.
    Recordkeeping and reporting requirements necessary to attribute 
catch to specific fishery management programs are specified at 50 CFR 
679.5 and summarized in section 2.1.1 of the Analysis (See ADDRESSES). 
Logbook requirements for trawl C/Ps have evolved over time, beginning 
with the use of a paper Daily Cumulative Production Logbook (DCPL), 
followed by development and use of a NMFS-approved electronic logbook 
(ELB) (Sec.  679.5(f)). If actively fishing, the operator of a trawl C/
P using a NMFS-approved ELB must enter all information into its NMFS-
approved ELB that is required to be entered into a DCPL (Sec.  
679.5(c)(4) and (c)(6)), subject to the same recording time limits for 
DCPLs (Sec.  679.5(f)(2)(iii)(B)(1)). In this preamble, the term 
``logbook'' means both the DCPL and ELB. Data recorded in C/P logbooks 
include information useful to fishery managers such as gear type, catch 
by haul, and assignment of a management program (including CDQ Program) 
to each completed haul. Certain information must be recorded by the 
operator of a C/P using trawl gear at various times during vessel 
operations as specified in regulations at Sec.  679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B). 
Trawl C/P operations with associated reporting requirements include: 
deployment and retrieval of trawl gear, completion of weighing all 
catch in a haul, and end-of-day reporting of information about the 
previous day's processing and production. This final rule does not 
modify regulations governing the required reporting method. This final 
rule modifies only Sec.  679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B)(1) and (2).
    Under the regulations at Sec.  679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B)(1) and (2) prior 
to this action, hauls assigned to the CDQ management program and hauls 
assigned to other management programs had two different time limits for 
recording the management program code in the logbook. Hauls needed to 
be assigned to a management program within 2 hours of completion of 
gear retrieval if they were not assigned to the CDQ program, versus 
within 2 hours of completion of weighing all catch in the haul if they 
were assigned to a CDQ program. This was an unnecessary discrepancy in 
the reporting requirements that created potential confusion.

Final Rule

    This final rule revises Sec.  679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B)(1) and (2) to 
state that a trawl C/P haul must be assigned to a management program 
(without regard to whether it is CDQ or non-CDQ) no later than 2 hours 
after all catch in the haul has been weighed. This action eliminates 
the discrepancy between the time allowed for recording the management 
program for CDQ Program hauls, as opposed to non-CDQ program hauls. The 
timing discrepancy created potential confusion for trawl C/P vessel 
operators participating in both CDQ Program and non-CDQ program fishing 
on the same fishing trip, and did not allow trawl C/Ps adequate time to 
assess haul species composition before assigning a haul to a non-CDQ 
program. In summary, this final rule: (1) modifies when a management 
program must be reported in the logbook for each trawl C/P haul; and 
(2) aligns the timing requirements for reporting each haul to

[[Page 38311]]

a management program across all management programs.
    Specifically, this final rule revises Sec.  679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B) to 
allow trawl C/P operators to assign hauls to any management program in 
the GOA and BSAI management areas under the same time limit. Language 
on when a haul must be designated to a non-CDQ management program is 
removed from Sec.  679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B)(1). Language is removed from 
Sec.  679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B)(2) regarding CDQ number, as it is duplicative 
given that Sec.  679.5(a)(1)(iii) requires that the CDQ number be 
recorded where harvest under the CDQ program occurs. Language is added 
to Sec.  679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B)(2) applying a single haul designation 
recording time limit for all management programs. With these changes, 
the timing of when a non-CDQ management program must be reported 
increased from within 2 hours after completion of gear retrieval to 
within 2 hours after completion of weighing all catch in the haul.

Changes From Proposed to Final Rule

    NMFS did not make changes to the regulatory text in this final rule 
from the regulatory text in the proposed rule.

Comments and Responses

    NMFS received six comment letters during the public comment period 
on the proposed rule (90 FR 47716, October 2, 2025). Commenters 
included one individual, one organization, and four anonymous 
submissions. Below, NMFS summarizes and responds to 13 unique relevant 
comments.

General

    Comment 1: This program is a positive step toward regulatory 
clarity and data integrity. By standardizing the haul designation 
reporting deadline for all management programs, NMFS can create a 
consistent, logical reporting process. This rule gives vessel operators 
the necessary time to accurately assess a haul's composition before 
making a designation, which is crucial for precise quota management. 
Aligning the reporting requirements across all of the management 
programs will hopefully enhance compliance and better the management 
for the fisheries.
    Response: NMFS acknowledges this comment. This rule simplifies 
reporting requirements for all affected trawl C/P entities by aligning 
and standardizing the reporting time limits for hauls assigned to all 
management programs.
    Comment 2: While the change may appear technical, it directly 
affects when and how captains and crew record and transmit operational 
data that feed NMFS's observer, electronic monitoring (EM), and catch 
accounting systems.
    Response: NMFS disagrees. This rule does not change how trawl C/P 
vessel operators submit data in the logbook and eLandings. These 
operators will continue to enter required information in the logbook 
and eLandings (Sec.  679.5(f)(1)(iv)). This rule merely simplifies 
reporting requirements for all affected trawl C/P vessel operators by 
aligning and standardizing the reporting time limits for assigning 
trawl hauls to a management program (i.e., without regard to whether it 
is CDQ or non-CDQ). Therefore, catch reporting systems used by trawl C/
P vessel operators will not need to be changed to comply with the 
timing change implemented by this rule.
    Nor will this timing change affect observer data collection, 
although the North Pacific Observer Sampling Manual has been updated to 
note the change in timing for when a vessel operator is required to 
assign each haul to a management program. Observers will continue to 
gather information from the logbook and report it to NMFS for catch 
accounting purposes; this timing change aligns the availability of the 
management program designation with other catch data points that are 
recorded for each haul. Likewise, this reporting timing change will not 
affect existing EM systems or data flows.
    Comment 3: The use of the phrase ``all catch'' in the regulation 
would enable vessels to weigh some, but not all, catch in order to 
prolong the delay from hauling to management program assignment, which 
would increase the potential for inaccuracies and haul mixing.
    Response: NMFS disagrees. NMFS continues to prohibit haul mixing 
under existing catch weighing regulations. This rule does not modify 
catch weighing or catch handling regulations. Additional time for 
recording of non-CDQ management programs is not expected to have 
substantial impacts on vessel operations or fishery conservation and 
management. Other required information is to be entered by 2400 hours, 
A.l.t., each day to record the previous day's information (Sec.  
679.5(c)(4)(ii)(B)), and all relevant data will be captured through 
existing reporting requirements. Typical handling of each haul includes 
some period of delay to facilitate handling and processing, but 
excessive delay is unlikely given that it would reduce fish quality, 
and thus marketability and profits. Therefore, NMFS does not expect 
changes to how trawl C/P operators weigh catch and, as a result, also 
does not expect an increase in haul mixing or inaccuracies.

Impacts on Small Entities

    Comment 4: NMFS must comply with the Regulatory Flexibility Act 
(RFA) and the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act 
(SBREFA) by either: placing in the docket the factual basis supporting 
any certification under 5 U.S.C. 605(b) that the rule will not have a 
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities; 
or, if such a basis is absent or insufficient, preparing and publishing 
an Initial/Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA/FRFA) that 
evaluates direct compliance costs on small catcher vessels and other 
small entities, considers significant alternatives, and, where 
applicable, conducting SBREFA outreach (5 U.S.C. 603-604, 605, 609).
    Response: NMFS provided the factual basis for certification under 
the RFA in the Classification section of the proposed rule (90 FR 
47716, October 2, 2025). In that certification, NMFS explained that 
this rule is a minor change intended to allow trawl C/P vessel 
operators fishing for both CDQ and non-CDQ programs more time to 
adequately assess species composition of hauls before assigning each 
haul to a management program.
    This rule applies only to C/P vessels and does not affect 
recordkeeping and reporting requirements for catcher vessels. There are 
30 C/P vessels impacted by this rule. Of those 30 vessels, only one is 
considered a small entity. Impacts from this rule are beneficial.
    This rule simplifies reporting requirements for all affected trawl 
C/P entities by aligning and standardizing the reporting time limits 
for trawl hauls assigned to all management programs (i.e., without 
regard to whether it is CDQ or non-CDQ). Current regulations require 
vessel operators to assign hauls to a CDQ Program within 2 hours after 
weighing all catch, in contrast to 2 hours after gear retrieval for all 
other management programs. This rule applies the timing for the CDQ 
Program to all management programs. Therefore, this action was 
certified at the proposed rule stage to not have a significant economic 
impact on a substantial number of small entities under the RFA and no 
initial regulatory flexibility analysis has been conducted. The 
Analysis prepared for this action provides additional information on 
the potential for economic impacts (see ADDRESSES).
    This final rule will be effective 30-days after publication in the 
Federal Register to provide time for regulated

[[Page 38312]]

entities to comply. Furthermore, NMFS notifies regulated entities of 
changes to reporting requirements and will conduct outreach prior to 
the effective date of this rule (See DATES).
    Comment 5: NMFS certified no significant economic impacts without 
providing the underlying data and analysis (e.g., number of small 
entities, expected per-haul incremental time, transition costs, 
variance in impacts between catcher vessels and larger platforms).
    Response: NMFS provided the data and analysis, including the number 
of directly regulated small entities, in the certification under the 
RFA in the Classification section of the proposed rule (90 FR 47716, 
October 2, 2025) and in the Analysis (see ADDRESSES). Please refer to 
the response for comment 4.
    This final rule standardizes management program reporting time 
limits, thereby increasing the time period for assigning non-CDQ hauls 
to a management program and providing increased flexibility to all 
directly regulated entities. Therefore, this rule will not increase 
costs for directly regulated entities. Further, while this rule changes 
when a trawl C/P vessel operator assigns a non-CDQ haul, it makes no 
other changes to the reporting requirements, and therefore does not 
impact any vessel operations. This rule does not regulate catcher 
vessels.
    Comment 6: Many catcher vessels and shore-based businesses involved 
in Alaska groundfish trawl operations qualify as small entities under 
Small Business Administration size standards. NMFS should consider 
revising the count of small entities affected and consider alternatives 
that minimize burden.
    Response: This final rule regulates trawl C/Ps and does not 
regulate catcher vessels or shore-based businesses. NMFS estimates the 
number of directly regulated small entities based on the annual 
earnings threshold of $11.0 million established on January 26, 2016 (81 
FR 4469). Based on Section 4.4 of the Analysis, only 1 of the 34 
directly-regulated entities is a small entity, and no directly-
regulated entities are expected to be adversely impacted by the rule. 
The estimated per-haul administrative burden does not change with this 
rule. This rule does not place any new regulatory burden on directly-
regulated entities, and only provides more time for affected trawl C/Ps 
to complete assignment of non-CDQ hauls to a management program (since 
CDQ-designated hauls already had the additional time for reporting). 
Therefore, this rule was properly certified under the RFA in the 
Classification section of the proposed rule (90 FR 47716, October 2, 
2025), and a regulatory flexibility analysis was not required.

Compliance and Implementation

    Comment 7: Provide a reasonable delayed compliance date or safe 
harbor of at least 180 days to confirm system readiness to allow 
vessels, shoreside partners, and vendors to update logbooks, EM/
observer workflows, software, training, and compliance protocols 
without enforcement risk.
    Response: This final rule will become effective 30 days after 
publication in the Federal Register, providing adequate time to notify 
affected vessels (see DATES). Please refer to the response to comment 
2. This rule does not require a change or update to the logbook, nor to 
EM/observer workflows or software for directly regulated entities, 
which are limited to trawl C/Ps fishing groundfish in the GOA and BSAI 
management areas. The North Pacific Observer Program updated the North 
Pacific Observer Sampling Manual to note the timing change, although 
observer duties and data collection onboard a trawl C/P will not change 
under this rule, regardless of which management program a trawl C/P 
haul is assigned to. NMFS has notified the public and affected entities 
of this change. This includes posting the final rule on  https://www.regulations.gov/document/NOAA-NMFS-2024-0154-0003 , a summary and 
link to the final rule and analysis on the NMFS Alaska Region website, 
and direct notification to regulated entities. Note that this final 
rule gives trawl C/P vessel operators more time to assign a haul to a 
management program and there are no compliance issues if the operator 
assigns a haul earlier than 2 hours after completion of weighing the 
haul.
    Comment 8: We request NMFS consider aligning the compliance date 
with the start of the next fishing year to simplify training and system 
updates.
    Response: The final rule becomes effective 30 days after 
publication in the Federal Register (see DATES). This timing provides 
NMFS 30 days to notify the directly regulated entities and conduct 
outreach about these changes. Since this rule does not place any new 
regulatory burden on groundfish fishery participants, and indeed gives 
trawl C/P vessel operators more time in which to report non-CDQ hauls, 
and does not change the required reporting method, implementation does 
not need to wait until the beginning of the next fishing year. There 
are no system updates necessary to implement this timing change. Please 
refer to the response to comment 7 regarding outreach and 
implementation of this rule.
    Comment 9: Provide clear guidance to impacted entities to assist 
with compliance and enforcement discretion to provide a grace period 
for inadvertent errors during the transition. NMFS should publish 
detailed guidance, including examples of when a ``haul'' must be 
designated under the new timing, how to reconcile entries across 
logbooks, EM/observer systems, and catch accounting.
    Response: Upon publication of this final rule in the Federal 
Register, NMFS will notify directly-regulated entities to aid and 
assist impacted entities with this transition. The logbook and observer 
data reconciliation process will remain unchanged after implementation 
of this rule. Although the time from gear retrieval to weighing of 
catch varies, the order of operations generally remains the same, 
including reporting. For example, if a vessel retrieved a haul at 6:00 
a.m., combined aging and weighing of the catch took 16 hours (vessels 
commonly allow catch to age before weighing and processing), and catch 
weighing was completed at 10:00 p.m., then under this rule, the haul 
must be assigned to a management program by 12:00 a.m. (midnight). 
Since this rule is less restrictive than the status quo, if a trawl C/P 
vessel operator followed their usual practice on assigning a haul to a 
non-CDQ program within 2 hours of gear retrieval, they will still be 
within the new timing requirement implemented in this final rule. 
Therefore, no new compliance issues should arise from this additional 
timing flexibility.

Paperwork Reduction Act

    Comment 10: NMFS should reevaluate and correct its Paperwork 
Reduction Act (PRA) determinations by explaining how the change in the 
timing of haul designation does or does not alter the time, manner, and 
frequency of existing collections of information. If it does alter any 
of those elements or the associated burden, NMFS should submit a 
revision to the applicable Office of Management and Budget (OMB)-
approved information collections, publish the required 60-day and 30-
day PRA notices, and delay the rule's compliance date until OMB 
approval is obtained (44 U.S.C. 3507; 5 CFR 1320.5, 1320.8).
    Response: This rule revises existing requirements for the 
collection of information for OMB Control Number 0648-0515 (Alaska 
Interagency Reporting System). This final rule changes the timing for 
reporting a management program in the logbook

[[Page 38313]]

and does not place any new regulatory burden on groundfish fishery 
participants. Further information is included under the ``Collection-
of-Information Requirements'' section below. Frequency of reporting 
will still be once per haul, and there is no change to the required 
logbook format or reporting mechanism. This rule aligns the timing of 
haul reporting requirements to allow trawl C/P vessel operators fishing 
for CDQ and non-CDQ programs on the same trip to better assess species 
composition before assigning a haul to a management program.
    Comment 11: Changing the timing of when the vessel operator records 
a fishery management program in the logbook raises significant concerns 
including the accuracy of the burden estimate, specifically that the 
change in threshold for reporting from gear retrieval to the completion 
of weighing all catch is variable and not reported in the logbook.
    Response: This final rule does not place any new regulatory burden 
on groundfish fishery participants. Instead, this final rule shifts the 
timing of when a management program is recorded for a haul and 
increases consistency and flexibility for C/P trawl vessel operators by 
aligning the reporting time limit across all fishery management 
programs to within 2 hours after completion of weighing all catch in 
the haul. Trawl C/P vessel operators already follow the timing in this 
final rule for assigning a haul to the CDQ Program. This final rule 
aligns the reporting timing of haul designation for all management 
programs. While completion of catch weighing time is variable and not 
reported, CDQ-designated hauls already follow this reporting timeline 
(i.e., 2 hours after completion of weighing of all catch), and NMFS is 
unaware of this presenting any problems in data compilation or 
estimation. Please also refer to the response to comment 3.
    Comment 12: NMFS's Alaska fisheries reporting tools include 
multiple integrated instruments (e.g., the logbook, observer and EM 
sampling records, and landing/catch accounting submissions). If any of 
these instruments or their instructions must be revised to match the 
new haul timing, a PRA revision is required.
    Response: This final rule does not require revision of the logbook, 
nor of observer and EM sampling records or landing/catch accounting 
submissions. The rule change is being noted in the North Pacific 
Observer Sampling Manual simply to ensure observers are aware of this 
change. This final rule revises the existing requirements for the 
collection-of-information for OMB Control Number 0648-0515 (Alaska 
Interagency Electronic Reporting System). Collection of information 
through vessel logbooks and through the Observer Program remain 
unchanged by this final rule and are approved by OMB in collections 
0648-0213 (Alaska Region Logbook and Activity Family of Forms) and 
0648-0318 (North Pacific Observer Program).
    Comment 13: If the preamble states there are no new or revised 
collections, that determination appears incomplete given the rule's 
core change to the timing of haul designation. NMFS should clarify and/
or consider the accuracy of the burden estimate and any changes in the 
timing or reporting from gear retrieval to completion of weighing and, 
if necessary, revise the rule's PRA treatment.
    Response: Please refer to the response to comment 10. This rule 
does not change data required to be submitted in the logbook or the 
number of respondents or responses for the logbook, and is not expected 
to change the logbook's time or cost burden. Thus, no change is made to 
the estimated reporting or cost burdens for the logbook.

Classification

Rulemaking Authority

    NMFS is issuing this rule pursuant to section 305(d) of the 
Magnuson-Stevens Act. Following previous actions taken by the Council 
and transmitted to NMFS under section 304(b), the FMP authorizes NMFS 
to take this action pursuant to section 305(d) of the Magnuson-Stevens 
Act. The NMFS Assistant Administrator has determined that this final 
rule is consistent with the GOA and BSAI FMPs and other applicable 
laws.

E.O. 12866 Statement

    This final rule has been determined to be significant for the 
purposes of Executive Order (E.O.) 12866.

E.O. 14192 Statement

    This final rule is considered an E.O.14192 deregulatory action 
because this rule increases flexibility for trawl C/P vessel operators 
fishing for groundfish.

E.O. 13175 Statement

    NMFS has determined that this action would not have a substantial 
direct effect on one or more Indian Tribes, on the relationship between 
the Federal Government and Indian Tribes, or on the distribution of 
power and responsibilities between the Federal Government and Indian 
Tribes; therefore, consultation with Tribal officials under E.O. 13175 
is not required, and the requirements of section (5)(b) and (c) of E.O. 
13175 also do not apply. A Tribal summary impact statement under 
section (5)(b)(2)(B) and section (5)(c)(2) of E.O. 13175 is not 
required and has not been prepared.

Regulatory Impact Review (RIR)

    An RIR was prepared to assess costs and benefits of available 
regulatory alternatives. A copy of this Analysis is available from NMFS 
(see ADDRESSES). NMFS is recommending the regulatory revisions in this 
final rule based on those measures that maximized net benefits to the 
Nation.

Certification under the Regulatory Flexibility Act

    The Chief Counsel for Regulation of the Department of Commerce 
certified to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small Business 
Administration during the proposed rule stage that this action would 
not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small 
entities. The factual basis for the certification was published in the 
proposed rule and is not repeated here. NMFS has responded to three 
comments received regarding this certification under the ``Impacts on 
Small Entities'' heading in the Comments and Responses section of this 
preamble. These comments did not raise substantive issues with the 
factual basis supporting certification. As a result, a regulatory 
flexibility analysis was not required, and none was prepared.

Collection-of-Information Requirements

    This final rule contains collection-of-information requirements 
subject to review and approval by OMB under the PRA. This rule changes 
the existing requirements for the collection of information for OMB 
Control Number 0648-0515 (Alaska Interagency Electronic Reporting 
System).
    This information collection is revised because this final rule 
changes the reporting time limit for when the operator of a C/P using 
trawl gear must report a non-CDQ management program to within 2 hours 
after completion of weighing all catch in the haul. This rule does not 
change the data required to be submitted in the logbook. The timing 
change does not change the number of respondents or responses for this 
logbook and is not expected to change the logbook's time or cost 
burdens. Therefore, no change is made to the estimated reporting or 
cost burdens for the C/P logbook.
    Public reporting burden per individual response for the C/P logbook

[[Page 38314]]

is estimated to average 15 minutes, including the time for reviewing 
instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the 
collection of information.
    We invite the general public and other Federal agencies to comment 
on proposed and continuing information collections, which helps us 
assess the impact of our information collection requirements and 
minimize the public's reporting burden. Written comments and 
recommendations for this information collection should be submitted on 
the following website:  https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/PRAMain . Find 
this particular information collection by using the search function and 
entering either the title of the collection or the OMB Control Number 
0648-0515.
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, no person is required 
to respond to, and no person shall be subject to penalty for failure to 
comply with, a collection of information subject to the requirements of 
the PRA, unless that collection of information displays a currently 
valid OMB control number.

List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 679

    Alaska, Fisheries, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

    Date: June 22, 2026.
Samuel D. Rauch III,
Deputy Assistant Administrator for Regulatory Programs, National Marine 
Fisheries Service.
    For reasons set out in the preamble, NMFS amends 50 CFR part 679 as 
follows:

PART 679--FISHERIES OF THE EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE OFF ALASKA

0
1. The authority citation for 50 CFR part 679 continues to read as 
follows:

    Authority: 16 U.S.C. 773 et seq.; 1801 et seq.; 3631 et seq.; 
Pub. L. 108-447; Pub. L. 111-281.

0
2. In Sec.  679.5, revise paragraphs (c)(4)(ii)(B)(1) and (2) to read 
as follows:

Sec.  679.5  Recordkeeping and reporting (R&R).

* * * * *
    (c) * * *
    (4) * * *
    (ii) * * *
    (B) * * *

                               Reporting Time Limits, Catcher/Processor Trawl Gear
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Required information            Record in DCPL      Submit via eLandings       Time limit for recording
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Haul number, time and date gear                  X   ............................  Within 2 hours after
 set, time and date gear hauled, begin                                                  completion of gear
 and end positions of gear, and, if                                                     retrieval.
 not required to weigh catch on a
 scale approved by NMFS, total
 estimated hail weight for each haul.
(2) Management program and, if                       X   ............................  Within 2 hours after
 required to weigh catch on a scale                                                     completion of weighing
 approved by NMFS, the scale weight of                                                  all catch in the haul.
 total catch for each haul.
 
                                                  * * * * * * *
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* * * * *

[FR Doc. 2026-12839 Filed 6-24-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3510-22-P