[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 122 (Friday, June 26, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 38526-38530]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12898]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

40 CFR Part 52

[EPA-R03-OAR-2025-0734; FRL-13009-02-R3]

Air Plan Approval; District of Columbia; Creation of Synthetic 
Minor Permit Program

AGENCY: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is approving a state 
implementation plan (SIP) revision submitted by the Department of 
Energy and Environment (DOEE) on behalf of the District of Columbia 
(DC). The revision pertains to creating a synthetic minor permit 
program and resolving the regulatory differences between DC's current 
regulations and those regulations approved previously in Chapters 1 and 
2 of the Air Quality Regulations codified in title 20 of the District 
of Columbia Municipal Regulations (DCMR). The intended effect of this 
action is to enable DC to create federally enforceable synthetic minor 
permit conditions for sources of criteria pollutants. The EPA is 
approving these revisions to the DC SIP in accordance with the 
requirements of the Clean Air Act (CAA).

DATES: This final rule is effective on July 27, 2026.

ADDRESSES: The EPA has established a docket for this action under 
Docket ID Number EPA-R03-OAR-2025-0734. All documents in the docket are 
listed on the  www.regulations.gov  website. Although listed in the 
index, some information is not publicly available, e.g., confidential 
business information (CBI) or other information the disclosure of which 
is restricted by statute. Certain other material, such as copyrighted 
material, is not placed on the internet and will be publicly available 
only in hard copy form. Publicly available docket materials are 
available through  www.regulations.gov , or please contact the person 
identified in the For Further Information Contact section for 
additional availability information.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Yongtian He, Permits Branch (3AD10), 
Air & Radiation Division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 
III, 1600 John F Kennedy Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103. 
The telephone number is (215) 814-2339. Mr. He can also be reached via 
electronic mail at   [email&#160;protected]  .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Background

    On November 20, 2025 (90 FR 52305), the EPA published a notice of 
proposed rulemaking (NPRM) for the District of Columbia. In the NPRM, 
the EPA proposed the approval of a revision to the DC SIP to create a 
synthetic minor permit program and to address regulatory differences 
between DC's current regulations and those approved previously in 
Chapters 1 and 2 of the Air Quality Regulations. The formal SIP 
revision was submitted by DOEE on August 11, 2023.
    A SIP-approved minor source permitting program can include 
provisions for issuing permits that establish federally enforceable 
emissions limits to restrict the Potential to Emit (PTE) of certain 
pollutants below major stationary source and major modification 
applicability thresholds. ``Synthetic minor'' permits establish these 
federally enforceable emission limits for sources obtaining 
construction permits and also establish these emission limits in the 
corresponding operating permits.
    This DC SIP revision is intended to create a synthetic minor permit 
program through provisions in title 20 of the District of Columbia 
Municipal Regulations (20 DCMR), specifically 20 DCMR Chapter 2 
sections 200.6 and 200.7 as amended, in conjunction with other 
provisions that already existed in 20 DCMR Chapters 1 and 2, that were 
previously approved into the DC SIP. These provisions enable a new 
source or modification of an existing source to limit its PTE below 
major source thresholds in order to qualify as a minor source or minor 
modification and to avoid applicability of major new source review 
(NSR) requirements, including the requirements of the prevention of 
significant deterioration (PSD) program in attainment areas and of the 
nonattainment NSR (NNSR) program in nonattainment areas. These 
provisions also allow new sources or modifications of existing sources 
to avoid Title V major source status by limiting their PTE. The SIP 
approved synthetic minor program will provide sources a mechanism to 
avoid Title V and new source review major source applicability and make 
those synthetic minor permit conditions both enforceable by DC and at 
the Federal level.

II. Summary of SIP Revision and EPA Analysis

    The District of Columbia submitted a SIP revision to create a 
synthetic minor permitting program. Section 200

[[Page 38527]]

(General Permit Requirements) of 20 DCMR Chapter 2 (General and Non-
attainment Area Permits) establishes synthetic minor program 
provisions. Section 200.6 allows DOEE to establish a condition in a 
permit issued pursuant to this chapter that limits, in a manner that is 
enforceable as a practical matter, emissions from a source so as to 
avoid applicability of the permitting requirements of section 300.1 
(i.e., Title V). Essentially, this provision creates a synthetic minor 
operating permit program, along with other provisions in 20 DCMR 
Chapter 2. Similarly, section 200.7 effectively creates a synthetic 
minor preconstruction permit program. Through provisions in sections 
200.6, 200.7, and other sections in 20 DCMR Chapter 2, DOEE establishes 
a synthetic minor program to issue synthetic minor operating permits 
and synthetic minor preconstruction permits in DC.
    In a June 28, 1989 Final Rule, the EPA established five criteria 
for an approvable state operating permit program. See 54 FR 27274. 
While that action is not directly applicable to the current DC SIP 
revision, as discussed in the NPRM, those criteria are useful for 
purposes of evaluating a State's synthetic minor program. The NPRM of 
this action described in detail how DOEE's SIP submittal satisfies each 
of these five criteria. See 90 FR 52305, November 20, 2025. In short, 
DC's synthetic minor program is consistent with the five criteria for 
approving a state operating permit program into a SIP. Permits issued 
under an approved program are federally enforceable and may be used to 
limit the PTE for sources of criteria air pollutants. In meeting those 
five criteria in the 1989 Final Rule, DC's synthetic minor program also 
meets the requirements of 40 CFR 51.160 through 51.165 on legally 
enforceable procedures, public availability of information, 
identification of responsible agency, administrative procedures, stack 
height procedures, and permit requirements. The DC SIP submission also 
meets the public notice and public hearing requirements of CAA section 
110(l). The EPA finds that these revisions in the DC SIP will not 
interfere with any applicable requirements concerning attainment and 
reasonable further progress, or any other applicable CAA requirement. 
Therefore, the DC SIP revision meets the requirements of section 110 of 
the CAA.
    Additional rationale for the EPA's now final action is explained in 
the NPRM and will not be restated here.

III. EPA's Response to Comments Received

    The EPA received three sets of comments on its November 20, 2025 
proposed action to approve revisions to the DC SIP. These comments, 
provided by Earthjustice, Citizens Rulemaking Alliance, and an 
anonymous concerned citizen, raised concerns with regard to the EPA's 
November 20, 2025 proposed action. A full set of these comments is 
provided in the docket for this final action. A summary of the comments 
and the EPA's responses are provided below.
    Earthjustice comment 1: The commenter raised concerns on the public 
participation requirements in the proposed permitting program. The DC's 
proposed SIP revision expressly waives public participation 
requirements for individual applications for coverage by source 
category permits (the DC's version of ``general'' permits or permits by 
rule). The commenter asserts that the DC's submission also fails to 
ensure effective public notice of proposed permits. The commenter 
further asserts that provisions in section 210.4 arbitrarily assume 
that providing notice by just one of these means will ``ensure 
appropriate means of notification.''
    EPA response: The EPA disagrees with the commenter. A ``General 
Permit'' (or ``source category permit'' in DC) refers to a pre-approved 
permit which applies to a specific class of significant sources. By 
issuing a General Permit, DOEE indicates that it approves the 
activities authorized by the General Permit, provided that the owner or 
operator of the source registers with DOEE and meets the requirements 
of the General Permit. The purpose of a General Permit is to improve 
efficiency and consistency, i.e., to reduce the burden of individual 
permits for minor sources, and to ensure all sources in a category meet 
the same standards. General Permits or source category permits also 
improve efficiency and reduce the administrative burden on air 
permitting authorities; thus, it is a commonly adopted practice among 
many State and local air permitting authorities to issue General 
Permits. Public participation is typically conducted prior to the 
issuance of a General Permit; public participation is not required when 
an individual source applies to be covered by a source category permit 
or General Permit.
    The commenter incorrectly characterizes the requirements in the 
DC's public participation provisions. In addition to section 210.4, 
section 210.3 has further requirements for public participation. 
Specifically, 20 DCMR 210.3 states that DOEE shall publish a notice 
regarding the draft permit or denial in the DC Register and shall make 
the information required by section 210.2 available for public 
inspection at the DOEE's office and by one or more of the methods 
described in section 210.4.
    Earthjustice comment 2: The commenter is concerned that the DC's 
submission provides a path for existing major sources to seek 
reclassification to non-major source status without requiring continued 
adherence to the more stringent controls required by the SIP under its 
prior major source status. The commenter contends that the revision is 
not in compliance with the EPA's rule governing synthetic minor 
programs (54 FR 27274, 27282, June 28, 1989).
    EPA response: The EPA disagrees with the commenter. The commenter 
incorrectly characterizes how the synthetic minor permit program works, 
because reclassification from a major source to a synthetic minor 
source does not weaken any controls that may be required by the SIP for 
a source under the source's prior major status. Classification of a 
source either as a major source or synthetic minor source is based on 
its PTE compared to the threshold that defines whether the source is a 
major source or a minor source. The reclassification process does not 
change the source's emission limits or requirements, and it does not 
waive or make less stringent any applicable limitations and 
requirements for the source. Thus, the reclassification process does 
not weaken any more stringent controls that may be required by the SIP. 
Therefore, this action does not violate any EPA rule governing the 
synthetic minor program.
    Earthjustice comment 3: The commenter asserts that the DC SIP 
revision did not provide assurance of adequate resources for the 
synthetic minor permit program. The Clean Air Act requires each SIP to 
provide necessary assurances that the State will have adequate 
personnel, funding, and authority under State (and, as appropriate, 
local) law to carry out the plan. See 42 U.S.C. 7410(a)(2)(E)(i). The 
commenter asserts that the DC's submission contains no such assurances.
    EPA response: The EPA disagrees with the commenter. The synthetic 
minor program is only a part of DOEE's air permit programs. Other 
regulations in DC's SIP have been established by DC and approved by the 
EPA to ensure that collectively, DOEE has adequate personnel, funding, 
and authority to implement its air permit programs. For example, 
sections 105 and 106 in

[[Page 38528]]

Chapter 1, sections 202 and 211 in Chapter 2, and section 305 in 
Chapter 3 have codified requirements related to procedures, resources, 
and the legal authority for implementation of synthetic minor permit 
programs. Specifically, 20 DCMR section 105 details the procedures on 
penalties, cost recovery, and injunctive relief for violations of any 
air quality laws or regulations. 20 DCMR section 106 details the 
enforcement process. 20 DCMR section 202 details the procedures for 
amendment, suspension, revocation, and denial of permits. 20 DCMR 
sections 211 and 305.5 detail the synthetic minor permit program's fee 
requirements for the construction, modification, or operation of a 
stationary source, or the installation, modification or operation of 
any air pollution control device on a stationary source.
    Earthjustice comment 4: The commenter asserts that DC needs to 
clarify the procedures for judicial review provisions. The commenter 
asserts that because 20 DCMR Chapter 2 does not contain its own 
judicial review provisions within the chapter itself, the EPA must 
reject DOEE's proposed revisions to the SIP and require that DOEE 
revise and make clear the public's right to judicial review.
    EPA response: The EPA disagrees with the commenter. The judicial 
review provisions for DC synthetic minor permits, issued pursuant to 20 
DCMR Chapter 2, are detailed in 20 DCMR Chapter 1, section 107.1. The 
provisions of 20 DCMR Chapter 3, specifically section 300, do not 
indicate that Chapter 3 is applicable to such permits. The period for 
appeal in Chapter 1, section 107.1 is consistent with DC statute.
    Anonymous concerned citizen comment 1: The commenter raises 
concerns alleging structural failures of synthetic minor programs, 
asserting that synthetic minor permitting regimes have a documented 
history of abuse, under-enforcement, and emissions gaming.
    EPA response: The comment is a broad comment about synthetic minor 
permitting in general. The commenter did not identify any purported 
flaws in DOEE's regulations, nor did they identify any specific issues 
regarding the EPA's proposed approval. Therefore, the EPA does not 
consider the comment to be relevant to this specific rulemaking and 
will not respond further.
    Anonymous concerned citizen comment 2: The commenter raises 
concerns alleging that the SIP revision is an arbitrary and capricious 
action under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). The commenter 
contends that the proposed action fails to adequately address the 
cumulative emissions impacts of synthetic minor facilities, the 
practical infeasibility of monitoring self-imposed limits, and the 
documented history of noncompliance associated with such programs. The 
commenter further asserts that the EPA also fails to explain any 
departure from prior agency positions recognizing the inherent risks 
posed by synthetic minor permitting, citing a report from the EPA's 
Office of Inspector General that repeatedly identified deficiencies in 
States' implementation of their minor source permitting programs.
    EPA response: The comment is a broad comment on governmental agency 
actions in general and does not identify issues specific to the 
proposed action.
    One of the main goals of the CAA is to assure the achievement and 
maintenance of the NAAQS in every state of the US. The state and local 
air districts establish laws, regulations, and specific air permitting 
programs to regulate the air pollution emissions from industrial 
sources so that the area under its jurisdiction can achieve and 
maintain the NAAQS. Whether an area's air quality meets the NAAQS or 
not is the ultimate criterion for evaluating the cumulative impacts of 
all air emissions sources in the area (including synthetic minor 
sources, which are the focus of this rulemaking). This action is 
neither arbitrary nor capricious since the SIP revision's underlying 
rationale and purpose will help DC achieve and maintain the NAAQS and 
enable DC to implement its CAA programs more efficiently. Furthermore, 
there is a rational connection between the facts and the agency action 
proposed in the NPRM, as well as the procedural requirements followed 
for public notice and comment by the EPA, that sufficiently demonstrate 
that the EPA did not act arbitrarily and capriciously in proposing to 
approve the DC synthetic minor permit program; therefore, this action 
did not violate the APA.
    The EPA disagrees with the comment that this NPRM deviates from 
prior agency positions recognizing risks posed by synthetic minor 
permitting. The EPA does agree that the identification of deficiencies 
in States' implementation of their minor source permitting programs by 
the EPA's Office of Inspector General helps strengthen some aspects of 
States' synthetic minor programs such as monitoring, recordkeeping, and 
enforcement by highlighting these deficiencies so that States can 
address them.
    Anonymous concerned citizen comment 3: The commenter raises 
concerns of environmental justice and public health impacts of the SIP 
revision. The commenter asserts that synthetic minor programs 
disproportionately affect communities already burdened by industrial 
pollution, and that the SIP revision's failure to assess these 
disparate impacts is inconsistent with Executive Order 12898 and the 
EPA's stated environmental justice obligations.
    EPA response: The EPA disagrees with the commenter. This action is 
consistent with Executive Order (E.O.) 14173 of January 21, 2025 
(Ending Illegal Discrimination and Restoring Merit-Based Opportunity), 
which rescinded E.O. 12898 on environmental justice, and Executive 
Order 14148 of January 20, 2025, (Initial Rescissions of Harmful 
Executive Orders and Actions) which rescinded E.O. 14096 ``Revitalizing 
Our Nation's Commitment to Environmental Justice for All''.
    Citizens Rulemaking Alliance comment 1: The commenter asserts that 
the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)/the Small Business Regulatory 
Enforcement Fairness Act (SBREFA) showing made by the EPA is inadequate 
because the EPA's proposal appears to rely on standard SIP-approval 
boilerplate language stating that such actions ``merely approve state 
law and do not impose additional requirements''. The commenter further 
asserts that the EPA should either prepare an Initial Regulatory 
Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) or provide a record-supported 5 U.S.C. 
605(b) certification that squarely addresses the incremental 
federalization of obligations and enforcement exposure, and that the 
EPA should also convene a SBREFA panel if an IRFA is required.
    EPA response: The EPA disagrees with the commenter. The RFA and 
SBREFA are inapplicable to this rulemaking because the EPA has 
certified that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on 
a substantial number of small entities. The regulatory analysis 
provisions of the RFA are only triggered by a threshold determination 
by the Agency that this rule will have a significant economic impact on 
a substantial number of small entities. Because the Agency has 
certified this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities, sections 603 and 604 of the RFA 
do not apply to this rulemaking. See 5 U.S.C. 605(b).
    Citizens Rulemaking Alliance comment 2: The commenter contends that 
there are Paperwork Reduction Act

[[Page 38529]]

(PRA) issues with this action. The commenter asserts that the EPA 
should identify the specific monitoring, recordkeeping, and reporting 
(MRR) provisions being approved, determine whether they constitute 
``collections of information'' required by or for the EPA, and either: 
(a) obtain an Office of Management and Budget (OMB) control number 
before finalizing this action, or (b) provide a reasoned explanation, 
grounded in the text of the approved provisions and OMB's regulations, 
for why the PRA does not apply to this action.
    EPA response: The EPA disagrees with the commenter. The EPA has 
complied with the PRA by certifying in the rule that the PRA does not 
apply because the action does not involve an information collection 
burden as defined by the Act. See 44 U.S.C. 3502(2).
    Citizens Rulemaking Alliance comment 3: The commenter asserts that 
the EPA should provide a reasoned explanation for its assessment 
regarding E.O. 12866, including any Office of Information and 
Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) significance determination, or submit the 
action for review if it has not already done so.
    EPA response: A ``significant regulatory action,'' as defined by 
E.O. 12866, generally is any regulatory action that is likely to result 
in a rule that may: (1) have an annual effect on the economy of $100 
million or more; or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a 
sector of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the 
environment, public health or safety, or State, local, territorial, or 
Tribal governments or communities; (2) create a serious inconsistency 
or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another 
agency; (3) materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, 
grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations of 
recipients thereof; or (4) raise novel legal or policy issues arising 
out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles 
set forth in E.O. 12866. This rulemaking does not meet any of these 
four criteria that define a ``significant regulatory action.'' The EPA 
has complied with E.O. 12866 by determining that this rulemaking is not 
a significant regulatory action as defined in E.O. 12866.
    Citizens Rulemaking Alliance comment 4: The commenter asserts that 
the proposal contains only conclusory statements that SIP approvals do 
not impose ``unfunded mandates'' as pertinent to the Unfunded Mandates 
Reform Act (UMRA). At minimum, the commenter asserts that the EPA 
should explain whether this approval ``may result in the expenditure by 
the private sector of $100,000,000 or more in any one year'' (see 2 
U.S.C. 1532) and provide its underlying calculations or the basis for 
concluding the threshold is not approached in DC.
    EPA response: The EPA has complied with the UMRA. This action does 
not impose an unfunded mandate and the EPA has made its own 
determination that this rule will not result in expenditures of $100M 
or more in any one year by state, local, or tribal governments, in the 
aggregate, or by the private sector, and therefore the Agency does not 
need to complete a statement under 2 U.S.C. 1532.

IV. Final Action

    The EPA is approving the changes to the DOEE's permit program in 20 
DCMR Chapter 2 to create a synthetic minor permit program as a revision 
to the District of Columbia SIP, pursuant to the CAA and the approval 
criteria specified in the June 28, 1989 Federal Register document (54 
FR 27274 through 27286, June 28, 1989).

V. Incorporation by Reference

    In this document, the EPA is finalizing regulatory text that 
includes incorporation by reference. In accordance with requirements of 
1 CFR 51.5, the EPA is finalizing the incorporation by reference of the 
DC air quality regulations in Chapter 2 of 20 DCMR, as described in 
section II of this preamble. The EPA has made, and will continue to 
make, these materials generally available through  www.regulations.gov  
and at the EPA Region III Office (please contact the person identified 
in the For Further Information Contact section of this preamble for 
more information). Therefore, these materials have been approved by the 
EPA for inclusion in the SIP, have been incorporated by reference by 
the EPA into that plan, are fully federally enforceable under sections 
110 and 113 of the CAA as of the effective date of the final rulemaking 
of the EPA's approval, and will be incorporated by reference in the 
next update to the SIP compilation.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ 62 FR 27968 (May 22, 1997).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

V. Statutory and Executive Order Reviews

    Under the Clean Air Act, the Administrator is required to approve a 
SIP submission that complies with the provisions of the Clean Air Act 
and applicable Federal regulations. 42 U.S.C. 7410(k); 40 CFR 52.02(a). 
Thus, in reviewing SIP submissions, the EPA's role is to approve State 
choices, provided that they meet the criteria of the Clean Air Act. 
Accordingly, this action merely approves State law as meeting Federal 
requirements and does not impose additional requirements beyond those 
imposed by State law. For that reason, this action:
      Is not a significant regulatory action subject to review 
by the Office of Management and Budget under Executive Order 12866 (58 
FR 51735, October 4, 1993);
      Is not subject to Executive Order 14192 (90 FR 9065, 
February 6, 2025) because SIP actions are exempt from review under 
Executive Order 12866;
      Does not impose an information collection burden under the 
provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.);
      Is certified as not having a significant economic impact 
on a substantial number of small entities under the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.);
      Does not contain any unfunded mandate or significantly or 
uniquely affect small governments, as described in the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 104-4);
      Does not have federalism implications as specified in 
Executive Order 13132 (64 FR 43255, August 10, 1999);
      Is not subject to Executive Order 13045 (62 FR 19885, 
April 23, 1997) because it approves a State program;
      Is not a significant regulatory action subject to 
Executive Order 13211 (66 FR 28355, May 22, 2001); and
      Is not subject to requirements of section 12(d) of the 
National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995 (15 U.S.C. 272 
note) because application of those requirements would be inconsistent 
with the Clean Air Act.
    In addition, the SIP is not approved to apply on any Indian 
reservation land or in any other area where the EPA or an Indian Tribe 
has demonstrated that a Tribe has jurisdiction. In those areas of 
Indian country, the rule does not have Tribal implications and will not 
impose substantial direct costs on Tribal governments or preempt Tribal 
law as specified by Executive Order 13175 (65 FR 67249, November 9, 
2000).
    This action is subject to the Congressional Review Act, and the EPA 
will submit a rule report to each House of the Congress and to the 
Comptroller General of the United States. This action is not a ``major 
rule'' as defined by 5 U.S.C. 804(2).
    Under section 307(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act, petitions for 
judicial review of this action must be filed in the United States Court 
of Appeals for the

[[Page 38530]]

appropriate circuit by August 25, 2026. Filing a petition for 
reconsideration by the Administrator of this final rule does not affect 
the finality of this action for the purposes of judicial review nor 
does it extend the time within which a petition for judicial review may 
be filed and shall not postpone the effectiveness of such rule or 
action. This action to approve the revisions to the DC SIP may not be 
challenged later in proceedings to enforce its requirements. (See CAA 
section 307(b)(2).)

List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 52

    Environmental protection, Air pollution control, Carbon monoxide, 
Incorporation by reference, Intergovernmental relations, Nitrogen 
dioxide, Ozone, Particulate matter, Reporting and recordkeeping 
requirements, Sulfur oxides, Volatile organic compounds.

Amy Van Blarcom-Lackey,
Regional Administrator, Region III.

    For the reasons stated in the preamble, the EPA amends 40 CFR part 
52 as follows:

PART 52--APPROVAL AND PROMULGATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PLANS

0
1. The authority citation for part 52 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.

Subpart J--District of Columbia

0
2. In Sec.  52.470, the table in paragraph (c) is amended by revising 
the entries for ``Section 200'', ``Section 202'', and ``Section 210'' 
to read as follows:

Sec.  52.470   Identification of plan.

* * * * *
    (c) * * *

                      EPA-Approved Regulations and Statutes in the District of Columbia SIP
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       State
       State citation            Title/subject       effective      EPA approval date     Additional explanation
                                                       date
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    District of Columbia Municipal Regulations (DCMR), Title 20--Environment
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
                                                  * * * * * * *
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Chapter 2 General and Non-attainment Area Permits
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 200................  General Permit           6/5/2020  6/26/2026, 91 FR [INSERT  Revised subsections
                              Requirements.                      Federal Register PAGE     200.6, 200.7, 200.8,
                                                                 WHERE THE DOCUMENT        200.9, 200.10,
                                                                 BEGINS].                  200.11, 200.12, and
                                                                                           200.13. Added
                                                                                           subsections 200.14
                                                                                           and 200.15.
 
                                                  * * * * * * *
Section 202................  Amendment,               6/5/2020  6/26/2026, 91 FR [INSERT  Revised subsections
                              Suspensions,                       Federal Register PAGE     202.1 and 202.2.
                              Revocation, and                    WHERE THE DOCUMENT        Added subsections
                              Denial of Permits.                 BEGINS].                  202.6,202.7, and
                                                                                           202.8.
 
                                                  * * * * * * *
Section 210................  Notice and Comment       6/5/2020  6/26/2026, 91 FR [INSERT  Revised subsections
                              Prior to Permit                    Federal Register PAGE     210.3, 210.4, and
                              Issuance.                          WHERE THE DOCUMENT        210.5. Added
                                                                 BEGINS].                  subsection 210.6.
 
                                                  * * * * * * *
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* * * * *
[FR Doc. 2026-12898 Filed 6-25-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6560-50-P