[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 122 (Friday, June 26, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 38543-38563]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-12951]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Fish and Wildlife Service

50 CFR Part 20

[Docket No. FWS-HQ-MB-2026-1421; FF09M32000-267-FXMB1231099BPP0]
RIN 1018-BI04

Process for Authorizing Seasonal Migratory Game Bird Hunting

AGENCY: Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.

ACTION: Direct final rule; request for comments.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: This direct final rule changes the administrative process for 
authorizing seasonal migratory game bird hunting in the United States. 
Migratory game bird hunting regulations are currently promulgated 
annually to provide opportunities for recreation and sustenance; aid 
Federal, State, and Tribal governments in the management of migratory 
game birds; and allow harvests at levels compatible with migratory game 
bird population status and habitat conditions.The U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service (Service or we) is adopting a more efficient 
administrative process for authorizing seasonal migratory game bird 
hunting. The Service will issue a memorandum for migratory game bird 
hunting once every 3 years. The Service will continue to make annual 
decisions on harvest levels and will update the memorandum sooner than 
3 years if changes are prescribed by our decision frameworks. The 
process eliminates the need for subsequent annual Federal regulation 
promulgation and rulemaking and is expected to increase efficiency; 
better meet State, Tribal, and Federal rulemaking constraints; and 
reduce the complexity and costs. Our goal is to better serve State 
partners and the hunting public while continuing to meet the legal and 
conservation purposes of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.Tribes are 
already authorized under a similar process.

DATES: This final rule is effective on August 25, 2026, without further 
action, unless significant adverse comments are received by July 27, 
2026. If significant adverse comments are received, we will publish a 
notification in the Federal Register before the effective date either 
withdrawing all or part of the rule or issuing a new final rule that 
responds to any significant adverse comments.

ADDRESSES: 

[[Page 38544]]

    Comment submission: All submissions must include the docket number 
(FWS-HQ-MB-2026-1421) for this document. You may submit comments by one 
of the following methods:
      Electronic submission: Federal eRulemaking Portal at: 
 https://www.regulations.gov . In the Search box, enter FWS-HQ-MB-2026-
1421, which is the docket number for this action. Then click the Search 
button. On the resulting page, you may submit a comment by clicking on 
``Comment.'' Please ensure that you have found the correct document 
before submitting your comments.
      U.S. mail: Public Comments Processing, Attn: Docket No. 
FWS-HQ-MB-2026-1421, Policy and Regulations Branch, U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, MS: PRB (JAO/3W), 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, 
VA 22041-3803.
    Comments submitted through any method not authorized in this 
document, or sent to an address not listed here, will not be 
considered. We will not accept comments via email, fax, or hand 
delivery. We are not required to consider comments that are submitted 
after the comment period ends or that are submitted via a method 
outside of these instructions. Comments containing profanity, 
vulgarity, threats, or other inappropriate content will not be 
considered.
    We will post all comments at  https://www.regulations.gov . You may 
request that we withhold personal identifying information from public 
review; however, we cannot guarantee that we will be able to do so.
    Document availability: Comments and materials we receive, as well 
as supporting documentation we used in preparing this final rule, will 
be available for public inspection on  https://www.regulations.gov  at 
Docket No. FWS-HQ-MB-2026-1421, or by appointment, during normal 
business hours, at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Division of 
Migratory Bird Management, 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, Virginia.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jerome Ford, U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, Department of the Interior, (703) 358-2606. Individuals in the 
United States who are deaf, deafblind, hard of hearing, or have a 
speech disability may dial 711 (TTY, TDD, or TeleBraille) to access 
telecommunications relay services. Individuals outside the United 
States should use the relay services offered within their country to 
make international calls to the point of contact in the United States. 
Please see Docket No. FWS-HQ-MB-2026-1421 on  https://www.regulations.gov  for a document that summarizes this final rule.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Why is the Service using a direct final rule?

    The Service is issuing this rule as a direct final rule. Although 
the Administrative Procedure Act (APA; 5 U.S.C. 551-559) generally 
requires agencies to engage in notice and comment rulemaking, the APA 
provides an exception when the agency ``for good cause finds'' that 
notice and comment are ``impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the 
public interest'' (5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B)). The Service has determined that 
notice and comment are unnecessary because this rule is 
noncontroversial; of a minor, technical nature; involves little agency 
discretion; and is unlikely to receive any significant adverse 
comments. Significant adverse comments are those that oppose the 
revision of this direct final rule and raise, alone or in combination, 
(1) reasons why the revision of the rule is inappropriate, including 
challenges to the revision's underlying premise; or (2) serious 
unintended consequences of the revision. A comment recommending an 
addition to the rule will not be considered significant and adverse 
unless the comment explains how this direct final rule would be 
ineffective without the addition.
    The Service is publishing this rule concurrently with a proposed 
rule because we view this as a noncontroversial action and anticipate 
no adverse comment since this is a change only in internal 
administrative process to increase efficiency in authorizing seasonal 
migratory game bird hunting. If we receive significant adverse comments 
by July 27, 2026, we may withdraw all or part of this direct final rule 
or issue a revised final rule. For further information about commenting 
on this rule, see the ADDRESSES section above.

Background

    Migratory game birds are species designated in the conventions 
between the United States and several foreign nations for the 
protection and management of migratory birds. The conventions restrict 
migratory game bird hunting to the fall-winter period (1 September-10 
March) and not more than 3.5 months (interpreted as 107 days) for any 
species. Under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA; 16 U.S.C. 703-712), 
the Secretary of the Interior is authorized and directed to determine 
when and to what extent ``hunting, taking, capture, killing, 
possession, sale, purchase, shipment, transportation, carriage, or 
export of any such bird, or any part, nest, or egg'' of migratory game 
birds can take place compatible with the terms of the conventions, and 
to adopt regulations for this purpose (16 U.S.C. 704(a)). The Secretary 
is authorized and directed to give ``due regard to the zones of 
temperature and to the distribution, abundance, economic value, 
breeding habits, and times and lines of migratory flight of such 
birds'' (16 U.S.C. 704(a)). This responsibility has been delegated to 
the Service as the lead Federal agency for managing and conserving 
migratory birds in the United States.
    The Service established regulations governing migratory game bird 
hunting at title 50 part 20 of the Code of Federal Regulations (50 CFR 
20). Currently, the Service publishes additional annual regulations (50 
CFR 20 subpart K) to authorize migratory game bird hunting for the 
season. These regulations set the parameters for open seasons including 
season dates, season lengths, shooting hours, daily bag and possession 
limits, areas where hunting may occur, and other restrictions based on 
biological data. The annual regulations ensure that harvest occurs at 
levels compatible with migratory game bird population demographics, 
including production and survival, which vary in space and time with 
habitat conditions. These conditions may differ over North America, and 
within the United States. (For purposes of our regulations, and in this 
final rule, the term ``States'' includes the territories of Puerto Rico 
and the U.S. Virgin Islands, consistent with 50 CFR 10.12).
    Migratory game birds use four primary migratory routes in North 
America. Because of the unique biological characteristics and the 
relative number of hunters in these routes, the Service adopted the 
flyway structure for administering migratory bird resources within the 
United States, referred to as the flyways (Atlantic, Mississippi, 
Central, and Pacific). The current annual migratory bird hunting 
regulations at 50 CFR part 20 subpart K establish regulations for each 
administrative flyway including all or portions of States in the 48 
conterminous United States. We may have separate regulations in Alaska, 
Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
    Each administrative flyway has a Flyway Council, a formal 
organization established through the Association of Fish and Wildlife 
Agencies. Flyway Councils are administrative bodies that

[[Page 38545]]

forge cooperation among public wildlife agencies for the purpose of 
protecting and conserving migratory birds that inhabit North America. 
Flyway Councils are composed of one member from each State within the 
Flyway, as well as States in Mexico and Provinces in Canada that share 
migratory bird populations. The Flyway Councils coordinate and collect 
information on the status of migratory game birds, establish regulatory 
decision frameworks, review available biological information, and make 
recommendations for appropriate parameters for migratory game bird 
hunting regulations. However, voting members are only those 
representing States and Territories within the United States. Service 
representatives participate in the Flyway Councils. Meetings typically 
occur every March and September and are open to the public.
    To support the annual regulation process, Service biologists 
gather, analyze, and interpret biological survey data and provide this 
information to all those involved in the process through a series of 
published status reports and presentations to Flyway Councils and other 
interested parties. The Service considers abundance of migratory game 
birds and other biological factors; and therefore, undertake several 
surveys throughout the year in conjunction with Service Regional 
Offices, the Canadian Wildlife Service, and State and Provincial 
wildlife management agencies. To determine the appropriate annual 
regulations authorizing hunting for certain game bird species and 
populations, we consider factors such as population size and trend, 
geographical distribution, reproductive capacity, condition of breeding 
and wintering habitat, number of hunters, and anticipated harvest.
    The Service Migratory Bird Regulations Committee (SRC) and Flyway 
Councils recommend to the Service appropriate parameters for State and 
Tribal migratory game bird hunting regulations. The SRC conducts 
meetings, generally in the spring and fall, to review and discuss 
information on the status of migratory game birds and recommendations 
from the four Flyway Councils and the Service. The SRC then develops 
recommendations for parameters for annual State and Tribal migratory 
game bird hunting regulations. In accordance with current regulations 
at 50 CFR 20.153, these meetings are open to public observation, and 
observers may submit written comments to the Service on the matters to 
be discussed. The SRC then submits recommendations to the Service for 
review. If approved, they are published in one of the several annual 
rulemaking documents for public comment.

Current Process for Authorizing Migratory Game Bird Hunting

    The current administrative process for authorizing seasonal 
migratory game bird hunting requires annual promulgation of State-
specific Federal regulations to open the hunting season. These annual 
regulations expire at the end of the hunting season. The process 
involves publishing a series of at least four proposed and final 
rulemaking documents in the Federal Register including the following:

    (1) A proposed rule (preliminary) that provides the process, 
regulatory schedule, and initial proposals for seasons, limits, and 
other regulations for annual migratory game bird hunting.
    (2) A proposed rule that proposes the parameters within which 
States may select hunting seasons. The parameters specify season 
dates, season lengths, shooting hours, daily bag and possession 
limits, areas where hunting may occur, and other restrictions.
    (3) A final rule that establishes the final parameters within 
which States and Tribes may select hunting seasons, including season 
dates, season length, shooting hours, daily bag and possessions 
limits, areas where hunting may occur, and other restrictions. This 
final rule incorporates public comments received on the proposed 
frameworks rule and recommendations from the Flyway Councils.
    (4) A final rule that sets forth the annual regulations in 
subpart K of 50 CFR part 20 to authorize the migratory game bird 
hunting seasons in each State. This final rule is developed based on 
a process where each State submits their selection of annual hunting 
seasons within our parameters.

    The process of establishing annual migratory game bird hunting 
regulations is both complex and time intensive. It begins with 
extensive data collection from May through December of the preceding 
calendar year, followed by several months of coordination with state 
agencies through the Flyway Councils. These efforts culminate in 
regulatory decisions made by the SRC. Each phase of this process is 
tightly sequenced, limiting flexibility in the timing of regulatory 
actions. Additionally, the targeted opening date of September 1 for 
hunting seasons imposes a hard deadline under which regulations must be 
finalized through the federal rulemaking process before any seasons can 
legally begin. This provides only a few months to complete a 4-
publication rulemaking process every year. The Service has narrowly met 
publication deadlines in the last 8 years (2018-2025 hunting seasons; 
average publication of final rule 7 days prior to the start of the 
hunting season), placing undue strain on States, the public, and the 
Service. We provided a detailed overview of the current process and 
administrative schedule in our August 6, 2015, proposed rule for the 
2016-17 migratory game bird hunting season (80 FR 47388).

New Process for Authorizing Seasonal Migratory Game Bird Hunting

    To alleviate the time constraint issues, the Service is issuing 
this direct final rule to change the process for authorizing seasonal 
migratory game bird hunting. This rule will codify in Federal 
regulations a streamlined annual process for authorizing migratory game 
bird hunting. This will replace the need for annual Federal regulation 
promulgation and reduce the need for future rulemaking in the Federal 
Register. The process will be codified in our regulations at 50 CFR 
part 20, subparts H and K, and include the following:

    (1) The process for determining the parameters (``authorization 
conditions'') within which States and Tribes may establish their 
annual regulations;
    (2) The process for communicating the authorization conditions 
to States and Tribes through a Migratory Game Bird Hunting (MGBH) 
memorandum and notice of availability in the Federal Register; and
    (3) Authorization for States and Tribes to establish migratory 
game bird hunting regulations in accordance with the authorization 
conditions set forth in the MGBH memorandum and regulations at 50 
CFR part 20.

    Federal regulation of migratory game bird hunting has been in place 
since 1918 under the MBTA, which directs the Secretary of the Interior 
to authorize hunting based on periodic assessments of bird population 
status and habitat conditions. The original regulatory process was 
straightforward due to limited biological information and relatively 
low hunter participation. As scientific understanding, data 
availability, and hunter participation increased, the regulatory 
process expanded in complexity to ensure resultant regulations were 
based on sound biological principles for conservation and hunting 
opportunities.
    Over time, the annual rulemaking process has become increasingly 
burdensome for States, the public, and the Service due to compressed 
publication timelines, administrative inefficiencies, and the growing 
volume of technical material required to support annual updates. These 
challenges have constrained transparency and limit the ability of 
States, Tribes, and the public to plan effectively.
    The new process maintains all statutory obligations under the MBTA

[[Page 38546]]

while improving administrative efficiency. Section 704(a) grants the 
Secretary broad discretion to issue regulations governing take and does 
not require annual rulemaking. Likewise, section 704(c)(3) imposes no 
annual requirement and ensures consistency with amendments enacted in 
the Dingell Act of 2019, including the January 31 framework closing 
date for hunting ducks, mergansers, and coots. Together, these 
provisions allow continued flexibility in how regulatory decisions are 
issued while fully adhering to statutory direction. The new approach 
retains annual biological assessments and decision-making but 
eliminates unnecessary repetition in the administrative process, 
thereby enhancing timeliness, clarity, and public accessibility.
    By codifying these provisions in regulations, annual rulemaking 
will no longer be required to authorize seasonal migratory game bird 
hunting. Future rulemaking will be infrequent and undertaken only if 
changes to the underlying process are warranted. The process is similar 
to that established for Tribes (50 CFR 20.110) where Tribes are 
authorized to establish hunting regulations within our basic 
regulations and annual parameters. The process also aligns with the 
regulations at 50 CFR 92 authorizing Alaska subsistence hunting, where 
the regulations do not expire and thus do not have to be established 
annually before seasonal hunting may occur.
    We are not making any changes to the biological approach or the 
process used to determine the appropriate parameters from which States 
and Tribes may establish their migratory game bird hunting regulations. 
The Service will continue biological monitoring and assessment 
consistent with the programmatic document, ``Second Final Supplemental 
Environmental Impact Statement: Issuance of Annual Regulations 
Permitting the Sport Hunting of Migratory Birds (EIS 20130139).
    This rulemaking changes the administrative process for authorizing 
seasonal migratory game bird hunting. We are making these changes to 
increase efficiency; better meet Federal, State, and Tribal rulemaking 
constraints; and reduce the complexity and costs associated with 
promulgating annual migratory game bird hunting regulations. Our goal 
is to better serve State and Tribal partners and the hunting public 
while continuing to meet the legal and conservation purposes of the 
MBTA.
    The nationwide economic effects generated by migratory game bird 
hunting are substantial, as detailed in the most recent annual 
rulemaking, estimated at about $2.7 billion in associated economic 
activity. Small, incremental adjustments made to Federal migratory bird 
hunting authorization conditions (limits) are not expected to 
materially alter those underlying economic inputs nor impose additional 
Federal costs. As a result, preparing a full Regulatory Impact Analysis 
for every annual MGBH memorandum would provide limited additional value 
for Federal decision-making. Annual adjustments to season lengths or 
bag limits have historically produced minimal and highly variable 
economic effects, and available evidence shows hunter participation 
remains stable despite such changes. As all previous annual rulemakings 
under the current administrative process have been ``economically 
significant'' actions under section 3(f)(1) of E.O. 12866, we intend to 
continue preparing a full Regulatory Impact Analysis, following the 
directives in E.O. 12866 for economically significant actions and the 
guidelines in Circular A-4, for the primary MGBH memorandum issued 
every 3 years under the new process to ensure continued sustainable 
harvest levels while also minimizing negative economic impacts.
    Table 1 provides a comparison between the existing and new 
processes for each major component in the process of authorizing 
seasonal migratory game bird hunting. The following sections describe 
the changes in greater detail.

              Table 1--Proposed Changes to the Process for Authorizing Migratory Game Bird Hunting
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Component                        Purpose              Current process          Proposed process
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regulations (50 CFR Part 20 subpart    Authorize seasonal       Promulgated annually as  Codifies the underlying
 K).                                    migratory game bird      State hunting seasons    process for
                                        hunting based on         in a series of four      authorizing migratory
                                        biological data.         rulemaking documents.    game bird hunting.
Decision Frameworks..................  Provide the structured   Described in preambles   No change.
                                        set of procedures,       in rulemaking
                                        rules, models, and       documents and adjusted
                                        information criteria     through rulemaking or
                                        that govern how          technical updates.
                                        authorization
                                        conditions are
                                        selected.
Authorization Conditions.............  Establish the            Set annually based on    Determined by applying
                                        parameters (season       biological data;         annual biological data
                                        dates, lengths, daily    published as proposed    to decision
                                        bag and possession       and final rules in the   frameworks; published
                                        limits, shooting         Federal Register.        as a memorandum and
                                        hours, hunting areas,                             notice in the Federal
                                        and other                                         Register every 3 years
                                        restrictions) from                                (or sooner if changes
                                        which States and                                  are prescribed by
                                        Tribes may establish                              decision frameworks).
                                        their annual hunting
                                        seasons.
Migratory Game Bird Hunting            Communicate the          N/A....................  Issued every 3 years
 memorandum.                            authorization                                     (or sooner if changes
                                        conditions to States                              are prescribed by
                                        and Tribes via our                                decision frameworks);
                                        website; announced in                             availability announced
                                        the Federal Register.                             in the Federal
                                                                                          Register as a notice
                                                                                          with a 30-day comment
                                                                                          period.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Regulation Promulgation

    This rulemaking changes 50 CFR 20 subparts H, K, and N. In subpart 
H, we revise Sec. Sec.  20.71 and 20.72 to provide that a violation of 
our regulations or of any State or Tribal law or regulation for 
migratory game bird hunting constitutes a violation of Federal law. 
However, we retain existing language in subpart H that prohibits take 
of migratory game birds except as provided in Federal, State, and 
Tribal hunting regulations.
    In subpart K, we remove the regulations at Sec. Sec.  20.100-20.107 
(annual

[[Page 38547]]

seasons and limits) and replace them with the procedures and provisions 
most recently adopted in earlier rules for establishing annual 
regulations for migratory game bird hunting, and we will no longer 
establish these through an annual rulemaking process. We retain in 
subpart K the current regulations in Sec.  20.108 (nontoxic shot zones) 
and Sec.  20.110 (regulations for certain Federal Indian reservations 
and ceded lands), as the regulations in these sections are outside the 
scope of this rulemaking action. We also codify in our regulations at 
Sec.  20.109 (extended seasons for taking migratory game birds by 
falconry) the unchanged parameters for special falconry seasons 
previously specified annually in preambles to rulemaking documents 
since at least the 2000-01 season. For the most recent final rule 
adopting the season parameters see 89 FR 68500 at 68518 (under Q. 
Special Falconry Regulations, August 26, 2024).
    We eliminate subpart N by moving the existing regulations regarding 
the Service Migratory Bird Regulations Committee and Flyway Councils to 
subpart K, which describes the administrative process for authorizing 
States and Tribes to establish their regulations for migratory game 
bird hunting.
    We are also making minor, nonsubstantive terminology changes to 
subpart B at Sec.  20.11, subpart C at Sec.  20.21 and Sec.  20.23, and 
subpart K at Sec.  20.110 to align with the new process. At Sec.  
20.11, we are making additional nonsubstantive edits to correct two 
typographical errors. We further update subpart C at Sec.  20.21 to 
recognize the split of cackling goose (Branta hutchinsii) from Canada 
goose (Branta canadensis) as separate species (see 85 FR 21282, April 
16, 2020, and 85 FR 51854 at 51860, August 21, 2020) and to clarify the 
regulatory language consistent with the final rule on hunting methods 
for resident Canada geese (73 FR 65274, November 3, 2008).

Migratory Game Bird Hunting Memorandum

    The Service will publish the Migratory Game Bird Hunting (MGBH) 
memorandum and notice in the Federal Register setting forth the 
authorization conditions from which States and Tribes may establish 
their migratory game bird hunting regulations. Authorization conditions 
include season dates, season lengths, shooting hours, daily bag and 
possession limits, areas where hunting may occur, and other 
restrictions for migratory game bird hunting.
    The MGBH memorandum will authorize seasonal hunting for certain 
designated migratory game bird groups or species of in the conterminous 
United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin 
Islands. Migratory game birds are defined in regulations at 50 CFR part 
20, subpart B, at Sec.  20.11 as those species included in the terms of 
the Conventions for the protection of migratory birds and belonging to 
five families of birds and for which open seasons are authorized in 50 
CFR part 20. Open hunting seasons may include certain designated 
members of the avian families Anatidae (ducks, geese, and swans); 
Columbidae (doves and pigeons); Gruidae (cranes); Rallidae (rails, 
coots, and gallinules); and Scolopacidae (shorebirds including woodcock 
and snipe). The Service maintains a list at 50 CFR 10.13 of all species 
considered migratory birds and protected by the MBTA, and we review and 
update this list regularly (see 88 FR 49310, July 31, 2023, for the 
most recent update). There are currently 185 migratory game bird 
species that may be subject to open hunting seasons based on the game 
bird families identified in Sec.  20.11 and associated species at Sec.  
10.13. The regulations for the 2024-25 hunting seasons established open 
hunting seasons in at least some part of the United States for 93 of 
these species. We will not authorize hunting through the MGBH 
memorandum for any migratory game bird species group (e.g., ducks) or 
specific species that was not authorized in the 2024-25 hunting season 
(89 FR 68500, August 26, 2024) without initiating a rulemaking. We do 
not currently expect that there will be a need to add any species to 
the list of game birds with open hunting seasons as this has generally 
been unchanged for decades.
    To determine the authorization conditions, we will apply the most 
current information on game bird demographics and habitat conditions to 
the decision frameworks previously adopted through rulemaking or notice 
published in the Federal Register to establish the authorization 
conditions. Decision frameworks are the structured set of procedures, 
rules, models, and information criteria that govern the selection of 
appropriate annual regulations from a set of alternatives based on the 
status of migratory game bird populations and habitat conditions. 
Decision frameworks are described in more detail below under 
``Determination of the Authorization Conditions for Migratory Game Bird 
Hunting.'' This rulemaking does not change the decision frameworks or 
their use in making determinations, consistent with the MBTA and the 
four associated conventions.
    We will make available the MGBH memorandum at the address indicated 
in FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT and on our website at  https://www.fws.gov/program/migratory-birds . The notice will include references 
to the supporting biological data we used in preparing the MGBH 
memorandum. The MGBH memorandum will include recommendations from the 
Flyway Councils, if applicable. The Service will issue the MGBH 
memorandum to set the authorization conditions for migratory game bird 
hunting once every 3 years on or before February 28. The Service will 
continue to make annual decisions on harvest levels and will update the 
memorandum sooner than 3 years if changes are prescribed by our 
decision frameworks. In this case, we will publish an updated notice 
and MGBH memorandum on or before February 28 with the specific changes. 
With respect to the 2026-27 season, the MGBH memorandum will be 
available shortly after the publication of this rulemaking, no later 
than August 31 (and the provision at Sec.  20.121(b) will become 
effective for the next season); the comment period will still be 30 
days.
    The notice of availability of the MGBH memorandum in the Federal 
Register will provide for a comment period of at least 30 days. We will 
consider all comments received but may not respond in detail to 
nonsubstantive comments. Consistent with our current process, we will 
summarize all relevant, substantive comments that we receive during the 
comment period. If comments warrant changes to the MGBH memorandum or 
if administrative or nonsubstantive corrections are identified, we will 
update the memorandum clearly identifying such changes without further 
public comment. Substantive comments that are determined by the Service 
to not warrant changes may be responded to after the closing date in 
any subsequent notice or MGBH memorandum.
    States and Tribes will establish regulations for migratory game 
bird hunting seasons through their own development processes that are 
within the Federal authorization conditions set forth in the MGBH 
memorandum and in accordance with Federal regulations. State and Tribal 
regulations for migratory game bird hunting will be federally 
authorized provided they are within the Federal authorization 
conditions provided in the MGBH memorandum and notice in the Federal 
Register, our regulations at 50 CFR part

[[Page 38548]]

20, and any other applicable Federal regulations.
    The Service will no longer continue the current practice of 
publishing State annual hunting regulations as Federal regulations. We 
recognize that this may be a transition for some states. Therefore, the 
Service may continue to publish State annual hunting regulations for up 
to 3 years for those few States that do not currently have their own 
processes for issuing annual migratory game bird hunting regulations. 
These State annual regulations will be published as a Federal policy 
memorandum, separate from the MGBH memorandum, available at the address 
indicated in FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT and on our website at 
 https://www.fws.gov/program/migratory-birds  when they become available 
in about July each year.

Proposed Administrative Schedule

    The Service will continue to have public Flyway and SRC meetings, 
public review of notifications in the Federal Register, and public 
review of the MGBH memorandum. The schedule will continue to be based 
on the current (2013) ``Second Final Supplemental Environmental Impact 
Statement: Issuance of Annual Regulations Permitting the Sport Hunting 
of Migratory Birds'' (see full reference in Required Determinations, 
National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.)). The 
substantive process for biological monitoring and assessment to 
determine the appropriate parameters from which States and Tribes may 
establish their migratory game bird hunting regulations will remain 
unchanged and will still occur annually whether a new MGBH memorandum 
is due to be published that year.
      April-May: As necessary, SRC meeting for proposed changes 
to the decision frameworks or hunting regulations, which we expect to 
be infrequent.
      April-June: Spring game bird population surveys.
      August: Completion of game bird population status reports 
and hunter activity and harvest report.
      September: Biological data are applied to federally 
established decision frameworks. Preliminary outcomes from the decision 
frameworks are prepared as the draft authorization conditions for 
migratory game bird hunting.
      September: Flyway Council meetings.
      October: As necessary, SRC meeting for proposed deviations 
and changes to the decision frameworks or hunting regulations, which we 
expect to be infrequent.
      December-January: Winter game bird population surveys.
      January: The draft annual authorization conditions for 
migratory game bird hunting are updated to account for new data.
      On or before February 28 (every 3 years): The 
authorization conditions for annual migratory game bird hunting are set 
forth and communicated via the MGBH memorandum and notice of 
availability is published in the Federal Register with a public comment 
period of not less than 30 days. An off-year MGBH memorandum may be 
published if changes are prescribed by our decision frameworks.
      March: Flyway Council meetings.
      April: If warranted, the MGBH memorandum may be revised 
for administrative corrections.
      May: Each State's proposed annual regulations for 
migratory game bird hunting is due to the Service by May 31.
      July: Federal policy memorandum with State annual hunting 
regulations posted on the Service website annually for up to 3 years 
after the final rule, upon request by the States.
      February-August: States and Tribes develop their 
regulations for annual migratory game bird hunting.
      1 September-10 March: Annual migratory game bird hunting 
occurs.

Determination of the Authorization Conditions for Migratory Game Bird 
Hunting

    Like the current administrative process, we will determine 
authorization conditions using decision frameworks based on the U.S. 
Code and the Code of Federal Regulations or adopted in the Federal 
Register as a final rule or notice. Decision frameworks refer to 
principles, processes, and practices that inform actions and outcomes 
(Lockie and Rockloff, 2005). In general, a decision framework 
identifies key components necessary for an organization or individual 
to make a decision and provides an overview of the process and 
transparency in decision making. By adhering to decision frameworks, 
decisionmakers can improve consistency, reduce biases, and ensure 
alignment with overarching goals and values. Our decision frameworks 
account for our goals and objectives, are developed in cooperation with 
State and Tribal governments, foster healthy and productive populations 
of game birds, and provide appropriate opportunities for the public to 
hunt those species. Some of our decision frameworks are complex, while 
others are simple, due to varying amounts of data and our understanding 
of population demographics and relationships to environmental 
conditions. In this final rule, we define a decision framework as a 
structured set of procedures, rules, models, and information criteria 
for selecting the appropriate authorization conditions from a fixed set 
of regulatory alternatives, each with a different expected harvest 
level, based on the harvest management objectives and status, 
demographics, and environmental conditions of the applicable migratory 
game bird population.
    The authorization conditions for 24 species or species groups are 
currently established based on 16 decision frameworks, and some have 
been in use for 30 years. For example, adaptive harvest management 
(AHM) decision frameworks for duck harvest management, a specific kind 
of decision framework including a formal mechanism for reducing 
uncertainty over time, were first implemented in 1995. The decision 
frameworks for determination of authorization conditions for hunting 
migratory game birds are listed in Table 2 below. We will maintain a 
list of current decision frameworks used to determine authorization 
conditions and post these on the Service's website  https://www.fws.gov/program/migratory-birds  with the MGBH memorandum setting forth the 
authorization conditions.

     Table 2--Decision Frameworks for Determination of Authorization
      Conditions (Federal Limits) for Hunting Migratory Game Birds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Species, species group, or
           season              Decision framework        References
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Special youth and veterans-   16 U.S.C. 704(c)....  16 U.S.C. 704(c); 84
 active military personnel                           FR 42996, August
 waterfowl hunting days.                             19, 2019.
Special early teal seasons    Special early teal    90 FR 40178, August
 in the Atlantic,              season guidelines.    18, 2025.
 Mississippi, and Central
 flyways.

[[Page 38549]]

 
Special early teal-wood duck  Special early teal-   90 FR 40178, August
 seasons in the Atlantic and   wood duck season      18, 2025.
 Mississippi flyways.          guidelines.
Bonus blue-winged teal bag    Bonus blue-winged     90 FR 40178, August
 limits.                       teal bag limit        18, 2025.
                               guidelines.
Ducks in the Atlantic Flyway  AHM protocol for      16 U.S.C. 704(c); 83
                               eastern ducks.        FR 47868, September
                                                     21, 2018; 65 FR
                                                     58152, September
                                                     27, 2000.
Ducks in the Mississippi and  AHM protocol for mid- 16 U.S.C. 704(c); 85
 Central flyways.              continent mallards.   FR 15870, March 19,
                                                     2020; 73 FR 43290,
                                                     July 24, 2008; 65
                                                     FR 58152, September
                                                     27, 2000; 60 FR
                                                     37314, July 19,
                                                     1995.
Ducks in the Pacific Flyway.  AHM protocol for      16 U.S.C. 704(c); 73
                               western mallards.     FR 43290, July 24,
                                                     2008.
Northern pintail............  AHM protocol for      90 FR 17300, April
                               northern pintail.     24, 2025; 75 FR
                                                     44856, July 29,
                                                     2010.
Scaup.......................  AHM protocol for      73 FR 43290, July
                               scaup.                24, 2008; 73 FR
                                                     51124, August 29,
                                                     2008.
Black ducks in the Atlantic   International AHM     77 FR 49868, August
 and Mississippi flyways.      protocol for black    17, 2012.
                               ducks.
Eastern mallards in the       AHM protocol for      87 FR 66247,
 Atlantic Flyway.              eastern mallards.     November 3, 2022;
                                                     88 FR 6054, January
                                                     30, 2023.
Canvasbacks.................  Canvasback decision   81 FR 17302, March
                               support tool.         28, 2016.
Brant seasons in the Pacific  Pacific brant         90 FR 40178, August
 Flyway.                       harvest strategy.     18, 2025; 85 FR
                                                     51854, August 21,
                                                     2020; 84 FR 42996,
                                                     August 19, 2019.
Dove seasons in the Eastern,  National mourning     78 FR 52658, August
 Central, and Western          dove harvest          23, 2013.
 management units.             strategy.
Sandhill crane seasons in     Rocky Mountain        80 FR 51090, August
 the Central and Pacific       population sandhill   21, 2015.
 flyways.                      crane harvest
                               strategy.
American woodcock seasons in  American woodcock     80 FR 51090, August
 the Eastern and Central       harvest strategy.     21, 2015 (removed
 management units.                                   ``interim'' label
                                                     from the strategy,
                                                     which was then
                                                     considered
                                                     operational); 75 FR
                                                     52873, August 30,
                                                     2010.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Currently, determination of some authorization conditions depends 
on Flyway Council recommendations based on formal Council harvest 
strategies (e.g., goose and swan seasons) and ad hoc decisions (e.g., 
coot and gallinule seasons). These Flyway Council harvest strategies 
and ad hoc decisions have been consolidated into five general decision 
frameworks, one for each of the four flyways and one for seasons that 
span multiple flyways. These five decision frameworks are being adopted 
by the Service in this rulemaking. These general decision frameworks 
prescribe authorization conditions that generally do not change among 
years and are based on the authorization conditions most recently 
published as a final rule in the Federal Register (89 FR 68500, August 
26, 2024). These authorization conditions have been demonstrated to be 
sustainable over the range of migratory game bird population status and 
habitat conditions. A copy of the Service's general decision frameworks 
is available at the address indicated in FOR FURTHER INFORMATION 
CONTACT, or at  https://www.regulations.gov , or from our website at 
 https://www.fws.gov/program/migratory-birds .
    As with the current administrative process, this new process 
applies biological data (e.g., game bird abundance, habitat conditions, 
hunter activity, and harvest information) to decision frameworks to 
inform appropriate selections of regulatory alternatives for the 
authorization conditions for migratory game bird hunting. We will adopt 
the outcome of the decision frameworks as the authorization conditions 
for migratory game bird hunting. In circumstances where urgent 
biological considerations arise, selecting more conservative 
authorization conditions may be necessary to support resource 
protection. In such instances, we would coordinate closely with the 
Flyway Councils and SRC and provide explanations through the MGBH 
memorandum, all which are open for public comment. These situations are 
expected to be infrequent and would inform subsequent updates to the 
decision frameworks through the formal rulemaking process. Examples 
provided below illustrate how such circumstances have been infrequent 
and addressed historically.
    We note that the Service and Flyway Councils have not recommended 
deviation from the prescriptions of the general duck season decision 
frameworks since they were first implemented in 1995. Thus, for nearly 
30 years, we have applied current biological data to established 
decision frameworks and accepted the outcomes as the authorization 
conditions for the general duck seasons. However, a notable example of 
a more restrictive deviation from a species-specific decision framework 
occurred for the northern pintail season in 2002 (67 FR 59110, 
September 19, 2002) and 2003 (68 FR 55784, September 26, 2003), when 
unforeseen circumstances (record low numbers, combined with the poor 
production forecast) indicated that a departure from the pintail 
decision framework was justified and consistent with the Council 
recommendations we received in those years. The Councils and Service 
revised the decision framework for northern pintails in 2004 to 
incorporate the new information (69 FR 52970, August 30, 2004). Also, 
the Atlantic Flyway Council and Service recommended more restrictive 
authorization conditions for the Atlantic Flyway population of Canada 
geese for the 2022-23 hunting season in deviation from the Council's 
harvest strategy (87

[[Page 38550]]

FR 42598 at 42603 (Atlantic Flyway Council recommendations under 4.B.), 
July 15, 2022). This restrictive deviation was based on unforeseen 
circumstances including an unusually high degree of uncertainty in the 
population estimate that year (95 percent confidence interval of 
92,000-235,000 pairs), lack of population status data in 2020 and 2021 
due to the coronavirus, and the lack of productivity data.
    The two cases of restrictive deviations from decision frameworks in 
at least the last 30 years indicate that such departures are unlikely. 
Restrictive deviations are unlikely because unforeseen circumstances 
rarely occur given the long-term nature of monitoring programs, some 
since 1955, and our decision frameworks are developed based on observed 
long-term demographic data. If the Councils and SRC recommend any 
liberalization beyond the authorization conditions prescribed by the 
decision framework, those changes will be reviewed by the Service, and, 
if supported, we will initiate a rulemaking to revise the decision 
framework.
    In some cases, for reasons outside our control, we may need to 
temporarily and minimally deviate from our decision frameworks to 
address missing data. For example, due to the coronavirus pandemic and 
associated travel restrictions and human health concerns in the United 
States and Canada, certain migratory bird monitoring surveys were 
cancelled in 2020 and 2021. As such, the Waterfowl Breeding Population 
and Habitat Survey, which provides status information for many species 
of waterfowl, including those used in our AHM decision frameworks, were 
cancelled during those years. When unforeseen data gaps occur, as in 
2020 and 2021, the Service may need to use time series forecasting 
tools and population and habitat models to make inference to current 
population status as needed in established decision frameworks. Such 
deviations would be limited to those necessary to determine appropriate 
authorization conditions in existing decision frameworks. Any deviation 
would be described in the MGBH memorandum, with any longer-term 
adjustments to decision frameworks addressed through future rulemaking. 
Temporary deviations from decision frameworks to address data gaps fall 
within the scope of existing regulatory authority and maintain intent 
of established decision frameworks. These temporary adjustments apply 
the best available data and scientific methods within the established 
framework and are critical to making informed decisions about 
appropriate authorization conditions for the current season when this 
would otherwise not be possible in the case of missing data. The 
compulsory, minimal, and urgent nature of these temporary deviations 
are appropriately communicated through the MGBH memorandum rather than 
through a separate rulemaking.
    Any technical updates or adjustments to the federally established 
decision frameworks will be published in a notice in the Federal 
Register to allow for public review and comment. This is similar to the 
current process for determining authorization conditions and hunting 
regulations, pursuant to which technical updates to decision frameworks 
are not adopted through rulemaking; rather, they are recommended by the 
SRC and supported by the Flyway Councils. In a recent example, the 
Service approved technical updates to the AHM decision framework for 
mid-continent mallards in 2020 (85 FR 51854 at 51855-51856 (under 
1.A.), August 21, 2020) and the national mourning dove harvest strategy 
for the Eastern Management Unit in 2023 (SRC transcripts; May 31, 
2023), Central Management Unit in 2024 (SRC transcripts; May 14, 2024), 
and Western Management Unit in 2024 (SRC transcripts; November 19, 
2024) based on recommendations from the Flyway Councils with 
application in the same regulatory cycle. All four of these decision 
framework technical updates involved replacement of the predictive 
population models with updated state-of-the-art models cooperatively 
developed by the Service, Flyway Councils, and university researchers.
    These technical updates are discussed at public meetings including 
the Flyway Council and SRC meetings and are open to public comment. 
After receiving support from the Flyway Councils and SRC, technical 
updates or changes to decision frameworks will be published in a 
Federal Register via notice or rulemaking and in the MGBH memorandum 
and made available for public comment. We expect changes to decision 
frameworks to be infrequent and will consider timing of Federal 
Register publication based on urgency and possible combination with 
other actions to minimize need for future publications.

Population Status and Harvest

    We periodically publish reports that provide detailed information 
on the status and harvest of certain migratory game bird species. These 
reports contain descriptions of species population segments referenced 
in status assessments. These reports are available at the address 
indicated in FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT or from our website at 
 https://www.fws.gov/library/collections/population-status ,  https://www.fws.gov/library/collections/migratory-bird-hunting-activity-and-harvest-reports , and  https://www.fws.gov/project/adaptive-harvest-management .
    We will use the most recently published reports in the development 
of annual authorization conditions for migratory game bird hunting. 
These reports currently include the following:
      Adaptive Harvest Management;
      American Woodcock Population Status;
      Band-tailed Pigeon Population Status;
      Migratory Bird Hunting Activity and Harvest;
      Mourning Dove Population Status;
      Status and Harvests of Sandhill Cranes, Mid-continent, 
Rocky Mountain, Lower Colorado River Valley and Eastern Populations; 
and
      Waterfowl Population Status.
    Additional information, status reports, and special assessments may 
be provided by the Service and each of the four Flyway Councils.
    Our long-term objectives continue to include providing 
opportunities to harvest portions of certain migratory game bird 
populations and to limit harvests to levels compatible with each 
population's ability to maintain healthy, viable numbers. The Service's 
goals and objectives for migratory game bird harvest management are 
specified in a 2013 supplemental environmental impact statement (notice 
of availability published at 78 FR 32686, May 31, 2013) and the 
proposed rule that published at 52 FR 7900, March 13, 1987. Migratory 
game bird hunting seasons provide opportunities for recreation and 
sustenance, and aid Federal, State, and Tribal governments in the 
management of migratory game birds.

Review of Public Comments and Flyway Council Recommendations

    We periodically receive recommendations on the authorization 
conditions and other policies and regulations for migratory game bird 
hunting from the four Flyway Councils at the SRC meetings, generally 
held in spring and fall. We may also receive public comments from the 
SRC meetings and notices published in the Federal Register. We consider 
all comments we receive but may provide detailed responses only to 
substantive comments. Based on such comments, and any additional 
information we receive, we may change the

[[Page 38551]]

authorization conditions, particularly for administrative corrections, 
or we may defer any changes until the next MGBH memorandum. Any 
administrative corrections to the authorization conditions will be made 
immediately through the MGBH memorandum available at the address 
indicated in FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT or on the Service's 
Migratory Bird Program website. These corrections will be identified 
either in the response to public comments or published in a revised 
notice if warranted based on the nature of the public comments. These 
corrections will include any errors made in the authorization 
conditions based on the application of biological data to established 
decision frameworks or significant typographical errors. Any 
recommendations for changes to regulations will be considered through a 
rulemaking process with at least a 30-day public review and comment 
period.

Adaptive Harvest Management Approach for Duck Harvest Management

    We will continue to use our AHM decision frameworks to determine 
appropriate regulatory alternatives for annual duck hunting as 
described in earlier rulemaking for annual migratory game bird hunting 
regulations (89 FR 68500, August 26, 2024). AHM is a tool that permits 
sound resource decisions in the face of uncertain regulatory impacts 
and provides a mechanism for reducing that uncertainty over time. We 
use an AHM decision framework to evaluate four regulatory alternatives, 
each with a different expected harvest level, and choose the optimal 
alternative for duck hunting authorization conditions based on the 
status and demographics of mallards for the Mississippi, Central, and 
Pacific Flyways, and based on the status and demographics of four duck 
species (green-winged teal, common goldeneye, ring-necked duck, and 
wood duck) in the Atlantic Flyway. We have species-specific AHM 
decision frameworks that guide appropriate authorization conditions for 
species of special concern, including black ducks, scaup, northern 
pintails, and mallards in the Atlantic Flyway (eastern mallards), 
within the general duck hunting regulations. These protocols have 
species-specific regulatory alternatives but share some aspects of the 
regulatory alternatives for the general duck seasons.
    We currently use independent optimizations to determine the 
appropriate regulatory alternative based on the status of mallards in 
the Mississippi, Central, and Pacific Flyways and status of the four 
duck species mentioned above in the Atlantic Flyway. This means that we 
develop authorization conditions for mid-continent mallards, western 
mallards, and eastern ducks independently based on the breeding ducks 
that contribute primarily to each Flyway. These species-populations are 
a surrogate for the status of ducks in general in each flyway. We 
provided an overview of the AHM decision frameworks for general duck 
hunting authorization conditions in each Flyway in an August 26, 2024, 
rule (89 FR 68500).
    The regulatory alternatives considered in the general duck season 
AHM decision frameworks associated with each flyway were described in a 
January 21, 2025, proposed rule (90 FR 7056). Regulatory alternatives 
include opening and closing dates, season lengths, daily bag limits, 
and shooting hours. Current regulatory alternatives for each of the 
four flyways include restrictive (relatively short seasons and low 
daily bag limits), moderate (intermediate season lengths and daily bag 
limits), liberal (longer seasons, higher daily bag limits), and closed 
seasons. The authorization conditions within each of these alternatives 
may vary by flyway. The differences in season lengths and daily bag 
limits among flyways reflect the historic differences in waterfowl 
abundance and hunter numbers in these regions. Each regulatory 
alternative has an associated target harvest rate for one or more 
species as a representative of all duck species.
    AHM decision frameworks are used with the most current population 
status, habitat, and harvest survey data to govern the selection of one 
of the regulatory alternatives (i.e., closed, restrictive, moderate, or 
liberal). These regulatory alternatives apply to all duck species 
except those for which species-specific decision frameworks exist or, 
in some cases, for species or population segments in which additional 
restrictions have been established. For example, additional 
restrictions within the general duck seasons are used to limit the 
harvest of certain less abundant species (e.g., scaup, northern 
pintail, black duck, eastern mallards, canvasback, redhead, wood duck, 
and mottled duck).
    The basic structure of the current regulatory alternatives for AHM 
was adopted in 1997 (beginning with the 1997-98 general duck hunting 
season; 62 FR 31298, June 6, 1997). Changes to these alternatives have 
been infrequent and are detailed in the January 21, 2025, proposed rule 
(90 FR 7056). The alternatives were last revised beginning with the 
2021-22 hunting season based on recommendations of the Flyway Councils 
(85 FR 51854, August 21, 2020).
    We anticipate that, under the AHM approach, the regulatory 
alternatives will remain the same over time, because the optimization 
process assumes that the expected harvest rates resulting from the 
various alternatives remain constant over long-term (about 100 years) 
forecasting. That process accounts for the uncertainty resulting from 
the difference between projected harvest rates and actual harvest rates 
in any given year. Recognizing that constituents may favor periodic 
adjustments to the regulatory alternatives, we will adopt a regular 
process to review and incorporate possible modifications.
    Although in the past the Service adopted the regulatory 
alternatives annually, that process does not account for the need to 
maintain predictable harvest projections for the optimization step in 
the current AHM process. We expect annual changes to the regulatory 
alternatives to have a negative impact on our ability to predict the 
harvest associated with each regulatory alternative. This approach 
would result in greater uncertainty in forecasting the impacts of the 
regulatory alternatives for a given set of environmental and biological 
conditions.
    We will adopt in regulations the same regulatory alternatives for 
the general duck seasons that have been in effect since the 2021-22 
season. (See 90 FR 17300 at 17302 (under B. Regulatory Alternatives), 
April 24, 2025, for the most recent rulemaking document that adopted 
the alternatives used prior to this final rule and 90 FR 7056 at 7061 
(under B. Regulatory Alternatives), January 21, 2025, for a description 
of the alternatives and their history.) We also will codify in 
regulations restrictions on the frequency of changes to these 
regulatory alternatives because of the need to maintain predictable 
harvest projections for the optimization step in the AHM decision 
frameworks. We intend to have the first open review and possible 
modification of these regulatory alternatives no sooner than 2026. The 
last modification occurred in 2021. Establishing duck regulatory 
alternatives for 5-year periods was the preferred alternative in the 
``Second Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement: Issuance of 
Annual Regulations Permitting the Sport Hunting of Migratory Birds'' 
(see full reference in Required Determinations, National Environmental 
Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.)).
    The intent for open review and possible modification of these 
regulatory alternatives should begin

[[Page 38552]]

with an announcement of the intent by either the Service or Flyway 
Councils at an SRC meeting at least 1 year prior to possible adoption 
of modifications. The modification of the regulatory alternatives for 
general duck seasons will be a rulemaking process with both proposed 
and final rules. We would include a regulatory impact analysis as part 
of these periodic rulemakings and continue work to expand the 
robustness of the analyses we completed in earlier rulemaking actions 
under the current hunting regulations process (see the 2025-26 hunting 
season final rule, 90 FR 40178 at 40192, August 18, 2025, and economic 
analysis at  https://www.regulations.gov  at Docket No. FWS-HQ-MB-2024-
0127).
    We note that we are codifying the alternatives for general duck 
hunting in regulations. However, regulatory alternatives from other 
decision frameworks are specified only in the preambles to rulemaking 
documents, not in the Code of Federal Regulations. We are codifying the 
duck hunting alternatives because the alternatives for general duck 
hunting apply in some aspects to multiple decision frameworks including 
those for duck species of special concern (e.g., black ducks, 
canvasbacks, eastern mallards, northern pintail, scaup), some brant and 
goose seasons, special youth and veterans-active military personnel 
waterfowl hunting days, merganser seasons, and some webless species 
(e.g., snipe, coots). Also, regulatory alternatives for general duck 
hunting have in part been prescribed by Congress in an amendment to the 
MBTA (16 U.S.C. 704(c); 84 FR 42996, August 19, 2019), and because we 
are codifying in regulations restrictions on the frequency of changes 
to these regulatory alternatives to facilitate the AHM process.

Duck Zones and Split Seasons

Background
    Zones and split seasons are designed to distribute hunting 
opportunities and harvests according to temporal, geographic, and 
demographic variability in waterfowl and other migratory game bird 
populations. For ducks, States have been allowed the option of 
splitting their allotted hunting days into two or three temporal 
segments to take advantage of species-specific peaks of abundance or to 
satisfy hunters in different areas who want to hunt during the peak of 
waterfowl abundance in their area. However, the split-season option 
does not fully satisfy many States that wish to provide a more 
equitable distribution of harvest opportunities. Therefore, we also 
have allowed the establishment of independent seasons in up to four 
geographic zones within States for the purpose of providing more 
equitable distribution of harvest opportunity for hunters throughout 
the State.
    In 1978, we prepared an environmental assessment (EA) on the use of 
zones to set duck hunting regulations. A primary tenet of the 1978 EA 
was that zoning would be used to provide equitable distribution of duck 
hunting opportunities within a State or region. The intent was not to 
increase total annual waterfowl harvest in the zoned areas; target 
harvest levels were to be adjusted downward if they exceeded 
traditional levels because of zoning.
    In 1990, we conducted a review of the use of zones and split 
seasons. We determined that the ability to detect the impacts of zones 
and splits on waterfowl demographics and harvest was poor because of 
the absence of adequate study designs and experimental controls, 
limitations in monitoring capacities, imprecise parameter estimates, 
and low power to detect changes in parameter estimates. Substantial 
concern remained about the unknown consequences of zones and split 
seasons on duck populations and harvest redistribution among States and 
flyways, potential reduced effectiveness of regulations (season length 
and bag limit) to reduce duck harvest if needed, and the administrative 
burden associated with changing regulations annually. Consequently, we 
established guidelines to provide a framework for controlling the 
proliferation of zones and split seasons. The guidelines identified a 
limited number of zone and split-season configurations that could be 
used for duck hunting and restricted the frequency of changes in State 
selection among these configurations to the first year of each 5-year 
interval (e.g., 2021 for the 2021-25 hunting seasons). The first 
hunting season that States could change their zone and split-season 
configurations was in 1991, with subsequent opportunities in the 1996, 
2001, 2006, 2011-2012, 2016-2017, and 2021 hunting seasons. The Service 
approved extension of the general 1-year period for States to change 
their zone and split-season configurations in 2011 and 2016 to 2 years 
due to special circumstances.
    In 2011, we prepared a new EA analyzing proposed changes to the 
guidelines for zones and split seasons. Revised guidelines were 
finalized in the preamble to a 2011 proposed rule (76 FR 53536, August 
26, 2011). In 2020, at the request of the four Flyway Councils, we 
modified the existing guidelines for duck zones and split seasons to 
allow an additional configuration including two zones with up to three 
season segments per zone for use beginning with the 2021 duck hunting 
season (85 FR 51854, August 21, 2020). States that select this new 
configuration must conduct an evaluation of impacts to hunter dynamics 
(e.g., hunter numbers, satisfaction) and harvest during the 5-year 
period it is implemented (e.g., 2021-25 hunting seasons) and need to 
involve human dimensions specialists in the assessment. The purpose of 
the evaluation was to provide information to allow the Service and 
States to better understand how the additional zone and split-season 
configurations might influence hunter recruitment, retention, and 
reactivation (also known as R3) efforts, and whether additional options 
run counter to our mutual objectives including the desire to simplify 
regulations and waterfowl population concerns.
    Previously, we established guidelines for duck zones and split 
seasons for each 5-year period via rulemaking (proposed and final 
rules) regardless of changes to the guidelines. We now will codify the 
existing guidelines for duck zones and split seasons (85 FR 51854, 
August 21, 2020), with minor clarifications, in our regulations. By 
codifying existing guidelines in regulations, we will need to undertake 
rulemaking only if we decide to modify the guidelines. To modify the 
guidelines for duck zones and split seasons, we will initiate a new 
rulemaking and issue proposed and final rules. Any changes to the 
guidelines will apply beginning the first year of the subsequent 5-year 
interval to maintain consistency in configurations within the 
intervals. At least 1 year prior to the possible adoption of any 
modifications, either the Service or Flyway Councils will announce at 
an SRC meeting their intent to review and possibly modify the 
guidelines.
Special Case Duck Zone and Split Seasons
    When we first implemented guidelines for duck zones and split 
seasons in 1991, several States had completed experiments with zone and 
split-season arrangements different from our original options. We 
offered those States a one-time opportunity to continue those 
arrangements, with the stipulation that only minor changes could be 
made to zone boundaries. If any of those States now wish to change 
their zone and split arrangement:

[[Page 38553]]

    (1) The new arrangement must conform to one of the currently 
allowable configurations; and
    (2) The State may not revert to the special case arrangement that 
it previously had in place.
Guidelines for Duck Zones and Split Seasons
    The following guidelines for zones and split seasons apply only for 
the regular duck season:

    (1) A zone is a geographic area or portion of a State, with a 
contiguous boundary, for which independent dates may be selected for 
the regular duck season.
    (2) States wishing to change their duck zone and split-season 
configurations may do so the first year of the 5-year period that it 
would apply (i.e., 2026, 2031, 2036, 2041, and continuing at 5-year 
intervals).
    (3) Once a zone and split-season configuration is selected, it 
must remain in place for 5 consecutive years.
    (4) Only minor (less than one county in size) zone boundary 
changes are allowed for any special case arrangement, and such 
changes are allowed only the first year of the 5-year period during 
which it would apply.
    (5) Minor (less than one county in size) zone boundary changes 
may be allowed for any State to resolve law enforcement or other 
boundary clarification issues resulting from implication of a new 
configuration. Changes would be evaluated on a case-by-case basis 
and must be approved by the respective Flyway Council and the SRC.
    (6) Consideration of changes for management-unit boundaries is 
not subject to the guidelines and provisions governing the use of 
zones and split seasons for ducks.
Configurations for Duck Zones and Split Seasons
    Any State may continue their zone and split-season configuration 
used in the previous 5-year period. If changes are made, the zone and 
split-season configuration must conform to one of the following five 
options:

    (1) One zone (same as no zones) with up to three season 
segments;
    (2) Two zones with up to two season segments in each zone;
    (3) Two zones with up to three season segments in each zone;
    (4) Three zones with up to two season segments in each zone; or
    (5) Four zones with a continuous season (i.e., no segments) in 
each zone.

    Because the two zones and three season segments configuration is 
new, States that select this configuration must conduct a one-time 
evaluation of impacts to hunter dynamics (e.g., hunter numbers, 
satisfaction) and harvest during the 5-year period it is implemented 
(e.g., 2021-25 period).
Mallard Management Units
    For the States that have a recognized management unit (Columbia 
Basin Management Unit in the Pacific Flyway, High Plains Management 
Unit in the Central Flyway) and include a non-management unit portion, 
an independent two-segment duck season with no zones can be selected 
for the management unit. The remainder of the State in the non-
management unit portion can be zoned and have split seasons according 
to existing guidelines. In the Central Flyway, additional duck season 
days afforded to the management unit must occur on or after the 
Saturday nearest December 10.
Process for Selecting Duck Zone and Split-Season Configurations
    States wishing to change their duck hunting zone and split-season 
configuration selection from within our established guidelines must 
provide their selected configuration and zone descriptions to the 
Service's Migratory Bird Program by the end of August in the year prior 
to the first year of the 5-year period that the selection would apply. 
However, we encourage States to submit their selections and zone 
boundaries as soon as possible. The Service's Migratory Bird Program 
will approve State selections once they are determined to be consistent 
with the above guidelines and zones and split-season configurations and 
boundary descriptions are complete. Any discrepancies between the State 
selections and the zone and split-season guidelines and configurations 
will be addressed by the SRC at their fall meeting, generally held in 
October. States may continue their zone and split-season configuration 
used in the previous 5-year period, and we will assume this is the case 
unless we receive configuration selections and zone descriptions from 
the State by the deadline for requesting configuration changes. We will 
publish State-selected duck zone and split-season configurations and 
zone descriptions in the MGBH memorandum.

Dove Zones and Split Seasons

Background
    In 2004, we recognized the need to work with the States to review 
our current policy regarding zoning for dove hunting (69 FR 52970, 
August 30, 2004). We asked the Flyway Councils and Mourning Dove 
Management Unit Technical Committees to review the current policies 
regarding the use of zones and split seasons for dove hunting, with a 
view toward establishing guidelines for the use of these harvest-
management tools, as has been done for ducks. Items considered included 
the number of zone and split-season configurations among which each 
State may choose, the frequency with which each State may change their 
configuration selection, and the need for a restricted framework 
opening date in southern zones. In 2006, we adopted a set of guidelines 
for dove zones and split seasons applicable in the Eastern and Central 
Mourning Dove Management Units (EMU and CMU) based on recommendations 
of the Atlantic, Mississippi, and Central Flyway Councils for use 
beginning with the 2007 hunting season and conforming to those 5-year 
periods used for ducks, for example, 2021-25 hunting seasons (71 FR 
51406, August 29, 2006). These guidelines were not extended to the 
Western Management Unit (WMU) at the time because they were not 
endorsed by the Pacific Flyway Council and no dove zones occurred in 
the WMU. Furthermore, the framework season length in the WMU was 30 
consecutive days, except in Arizona and California where the season 
length was 60 days and could be split into two segments.
    The season length in the WMU was expanded to 60 days beginning with 
the 2014 hunting season (78 FR 52658 at 52662, August 23, 2013, and 79 
FR 51402 at 51405, August 28, 2014). The Pacific Flyway Council 
requested the same flexibility for zones and split seasons that we have 
afforded the EMU and CMU, with the exception that the WMU would be 
allowed only two season segments in one or both zones rather than 
three. Thus, in 2020, we extended the guidelines for dove zones and 
split seasons to the WMU, with the exception that seasons may be split 
into no more than two segments (85 FR 51854, August 21, 2020).
    Similar to the situation for ducks, described above, we previously 
established guidelines for dove zones and split seasons for each 5-year 
period via rulemaking (proposed and final rules) regardless of changes 
to the guidelines. We now adopt the existing guidelines for dove zones 
and split seasons (85 FR 51854, August 21, 2020), with minor 
clarifications, in our regulations. By codifying existing guidelines in 
regulations, we will need to undertake rulemaking only if we decide to 
modify the guidelines. To modify the guidelines for dove zones and 
split seasons, we will initiate a new rulemaking and issue proposed and 
final rules. Any changes to the guidelines will apply beginning the 
first year of the 5-year interval to maintain consistency in 
configurations within the intervals. At least 1 year prior to the 
possible adoption of any modifications, either the Service or Flyway 
Councils

[[Page 38554]]

will announce at an SRC meeting their intent to review and possibly 
modify the guidelines.
Special Case Dove Zone and Split Seasons
    When we first implemented the guidelines for dove zones and split 
seasons in 2006, some States had completed experiments with zone and 
split-season arrangements different from our original options. We 
offered those States a one-time opportunity to continue those 
arrangements (special case), with the stipulation that only minor 
changes could be made to zone boundaries. If any of those States now 
wish to change their zone and split arrangement:

    (1) The new arrangement must conform to one of the currently 
allowable configurations; and
    (2) The State may not revert to the special case arrangement 
that it previously had in place.
Guidelines for Dove Zones and Split Seasons
    The following guidelines for zones and split seasons apply only for 
the regular dove season:

    (1) A zone is a geographic area or portion of a State, with a 
contiguous boundary, for which independent seasons may be selected 
for the regular dove season.
    (2) States wishing to change their dove zone and split-season 
configurations may do so the first year of the 5-year period that it 
would apply (i.e., 2026, 2031, 2036, 2041, and continuing at 5-year 
intervals).
    (3) Once a zone and split-season configuration is selected, it 
must remain in place for 5 consecutive years.
    (4) Only minor (less than one county in size) zone boundary 
changes would be allowed for any special case arrangement, and such 
changes are allowed only beginning the first year of the 5-year 
period during which it would apply.
    (5) Minor (less than one county in size) zone boundary changes 
may be allowed for any State to resolve law enforcement or other 
boundary clarification issues resulting from implication of a new 
configuration. Changes will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and 
must be approved by the respective Flyway Council and the SRC.

Configurations for Dove Zones and Split Seasons
    Any State may continue their dove zone and split-season 
configuration selected in the previous 5-year period. If changes are 
made, the zone and split-season configuration must conform to one of 
the following two options:

    (1) One zone (same as no zones) with up to three season 
segments; or
    (2) Two zones with up to three season segments in each zone, 
except in the WMU where the season in one or both zones may be split 
into two segments.

Process for Selecting Dove Zone and Split-Season Configurations
    The process for States to select their dove hunting zone and split-
season configuration is the same as that for selecting the duck hunting 
zone and split-season configuration. States wishing to change their 
dove zone and split-season configuration selection from within our 
established guidelines must provide their selected configuration and 
zone descriptions to the Service's Migratory Bird Program by the end of 
August in the year prior to the first year of the 5-year period that 
the selection would apply. However, we encourage States to submit their 
selections and zone boundaries as soon as possible. The Service's 
Migratory Bird Program will approve State selections once they are 
determined to be consistent with the above guidelines and zones and 
split-season configurations and boundary descriptions are complete. Any 
discrepancies between the State selections and the zone and split-
season guidelines and configurations will be addressed by the SRC at 
their fall meeting, generally held in October. States may continue 
their zone and split-season configuration used in the previous 5-year 
period, and we will assume this is the case unless we receive 
configuration selections and zone descriptions from the State by the 
deadline for requesting configuration changes. We will publish State-
selected dove zone and split-season configurations and zone 
descriptions in the MGBH memorandum.

Special Seasons

    Special seasons may be used for species considered to be 
underutilized, to address nuisance problems with overabundant species, 
or to provide special hunting opportunities. Special seasons differ 
from regular seasons in that they entail additional hunting opportunity 
outside the established regular seasons but within the 107-day limit 
mandated by the MBTA. Special seasons are used only for species whose 
migration and distribution provide opportunities outside the period in 
which regular seasons are held and when harvest can be achieved without 
appreciable impacts to nontarget species. An important tenet of special 
seasons is that harvest pressure can be effectively directed primarily 
at target species or population segments that can be temporally and 
geographically isolated to avoid nontarget take. Currently, special 
seasons include: (1) Early teal seasons in the Atlantic, Mississippi, 
and Central Flyways; (2) bonus blue-winged teal bag limits in certain 
States in the Mississippi and Central Flyways; (3) early teal and wood 
duck seasons in Florida, Kentucky, and Tennessee; (4) waterfowl hunting 
days for youth and veterans-active military personnel; and (5) early 
seasons on overabundant resident Canada and cackling geese.
    The Service has required that States implementing special seasons 
conduct experiments to assess the biological impacts of those seasons 
on both target and nontarget species. However, the Service eliminated 
experimental evaluation requirements for special seasons on 
overabundant resident Canada and cackling geese, except: (1) in areas 
where previous evaluations indicate an unacceptable level of take of 
migrant Canada and cackling geese; and (2) in areas where evaluations 
have not been conducted and one could reasonably expect an unacceptable 
level of take of migrant Canada and cackling geese (e.g., areas in 
northern States). All special seasons require Flyway Council 
endorsement, and Flyway Councils may request evaluation of any special 
season as part of the approval process if they believe such evaluations 
to be warranted. Additionally, if conditions are believed to have 
changed, new evaluations can be conducted for areas in which prior 
evaluations failed with respect to the take of migrant Canada and 
cackling geese. The Service may periodically reevaluate special seasons 
on a case-by-case basis to determine whether they are still justified 
and will continue to require experiments for any new special seasons 
other than those described for overabundant resident Canada and 
cackling geese. Any new special seasons will be established through a 
new rulemaking process, which we expect to be infrequent, involving a 
proposed and final rule.

Experimental Seasons

    Experimental seasons are used to evaluate expansion of regular 
seasons to new areas; the use of zones and splits in duck, dove, and, 
in some cases, goose seasons; special seasons; and alternative 
regulations for regular or special seasons. The Service may require 
implementing States to conduct research for at least 3 years to assess 
the environmental effects of experimental seasons, including on target 
and nontarget species. The Service may also require a memorandum of 
understanding with any State that implements experimental seasons. 
Experimental seasons may be authorized for up to 5 years, after which a 
new request must be submitted. A season may be offered on an

[[Page 38555]]

experimental basis or change from experimental status to operational 
status upon approval by the respective Flyway Council(s) and the SRC. 
Any new experimental season will be established through a new 
rulemaking process, which we expect to be infrequent, involving a 
proposed and final rule. Change in season status from experimental to 
operational will be included in the MGBH memorandum.

Relationship to Regulations for Crow Hunting

    Crows are in the family Corvidae and were not initially identified 
as a migratory bird in the four bilateral conventions for the 
protection of migratory birds. The family was added to the list of 
migratory birds with the convention amendment with Mexico in 1972. 
However, crows were not identified as a game bird; Corvidae are not one 
of the five families that comprise migratory game birds. At the time 
Federal protection was extended to Corvidae, some States had existing 
hunting seasons for crows. Therefore, Federal regulations were 
established to allow crow hunting; see 50 CFR part 20, subpart L, at 
Sec.  20.133, hunting regulations for crows. Federal regulations allow 
States to establish dates and durations of hunting seasons, bag and 
possession limits, and methods of taking crows, subject to limitations 
defined in Sec.  20.133. The hunting season on crows can have a maximum 
of 124 days within a calendar year because of specific provisions 
included in the convention with Mexico and must be outside the peak 
crow nesting period. Some States allow crow hunting 4 days a week, 
extending the open season nearly 8 months. Most States have no daily 
bag limit on crows. Crows may also be taken under a depredation order 
as defined in Sec.  21.150, the depredation order for blackbirds, 
cowbirds, crows, grackles, and magpies.
    Migratory bird hunting regulations at 50 CFR part 20 apply to game 
birds and crows. Thus, we make the distinction in our regulations 
between migratory bird hunting (crows included) and migratory game bird 
hunting (crows excluded). Thus, crow hunting regulations (Sec.  20.133) 
are not affected by this rulemaking regarding the administrative 
process for authorizing migratory game bird hunting. However, this 
rulemaking action revises Sec.  20.133 to authorize Tribes to establish 
crow hunting regulations along with the States to be consistent with 
our Tribal migratory game bird hunting regulations at Sec.  20.110 (see 
88 FR 60375, September 1, 2023).

Flyways and Management Units

    We generally establish the authorization conditions for migratory 
game bird hunting for the conterminous U.S. States by flyway or 
management unit/region. We will include the authorization conditions 
for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands in 
separate sections near the end of the MGBH memorandum. The States 
included in the flyways and management units/regions are described 
below:
Flyways
    Atlantic Flyway: Includes Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, 
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, 
North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Vermont, 
Virginia, and West Virginia.
    Mississippi Flyway: Includes Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, 
Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, 
Ohio, Tennessee, and Wisconsin.
    Central Flyway: Includes Colorado (east of the Continental Divide), 
Kansas, Montana (Counties of Blaine, Carbon, Fergus, Judith Basin, 
Stillwater, Sweetgrass, Wheatland, and all counties east thereof), 
Nebraska, New Mexico (east of the Continental Divide except the 
Jicarilla Apache Indian Reservation), North Dakota, Oklahoma, South 
Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming (east of the Continental Divide).
    Pacific Flyway: Includes Arizona, California, Idaho, Nevada, 
Oregon, Utah, Washington, and those portions of Colorado, Montana, New 
Mexico, and Wyoming not included in the Central Flyway.
Mallard Management Units
    High Plains Management Unit: Roughly defined as that portion of the 
Central Flyway that lies west of the 100th meridian.
    Columbia Basin Management Unit: In Washington, all areas east of 
the Pacific Crest Trail and east of the Big White Salmon River in 
Klickitat County; and in Oregon, the counties of Gilliam, Morrow, and 
Umatilla.
Mourning Dove Management Units
    Eastern Management Unit: All States east of the Mississippi River, 
and Louisiana.
    Central Management Unit: Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, 
Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, 
Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming.
    Western Management Unit: Arizona, California, Idaho, Nevada, 
Oregon, Utah, and Washington.
Woodcock Management Regions
    Eastern Management Region: Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, 
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, 
North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Vermont, 
Virginia, and West Virginia.
    Central Management Region: Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, 
Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, 
Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, 
Tennessee, Texas, and Wisconsin.

Required Determinations

National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.)

    The programmatic document, ``Second Final Supplemental 
Environmental Impact Statement: Issuance of Annual Regulations 
Permitting the Sport Hunting of Migratory Birds (EIS 20130139),'' filed 
with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on May 24, 2013, 
addresses criteria of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA; 42 
U.S.C. 4321 et seq.) compliance by the Service for issuance of the 
annual framework regulations for hunting of migratory game bird 
species. We published a notice of availability in the Federal Register 
on May 31, 2013 (78 FR 32686), and our Record of Decision on July 26, 
2013 (78 FR 45376). This EIS and Record of Decision continue to apply 
to the new process for authorizing seasonal game bird hunting. Further, 
the new hunting regulations process is more compliant with these NEPA 
documents than the current process. Specifically, there were two 
preferred alternatives in the NEPA documents that are only now being 
implemented with the new process. These include the frequency of review 
and adoption of duck regulatory packages and zones and split season 
guidelines. The preferred alternative in both cases is to establish 
these packages and guidelines for at least a 5-year period, with 
changes limited to not sooner than every 5 years, and then after that 
only when necessary (see above under Adaptive Harvest Management 
Approach for Duck Harvest Management, and Duck Zones and Split Seasons, 
and Dove Zones and Split Seasons for more details). We currently 
propose and finalize these regulations every year or 5 years regardless 
of changes. We address NEPA compliance for zones and split hunting 
seasons through the preparation of environmental assessments, the most 
recent being the Zones and Split Seasons for Duck Hunting and its

[[Page 38556]]

corresponding 2011 finding of no significant impact.
    This direct final rule is administrative in nature and is 
categorically excluded. It revises the process for transmitting 
authorization conditions for seasonal migratory game bird hunting to 
States and Tribes. Importantly, it does not alter the substantive 
annual biological monitoring and assessment process that determines 
those conditions.
    The categorical exclusion determination is based on primarily 43 
CFR 46.210(i) (in addition to 43 CFR 46.205 and 46.215), which provides 
that policies, directives, regulations, and guidelines of 
administrative, financial, legal, technical, or procedural nature 
qualify for categorical exclusion. The environmental effects of this 
action are too broad or speculative to lend themselves to meaningful 
analysis and are addressed in an environmental action statement, which 
is part of the record for this direct final rule and available for 
public inspection as provided in ADDRESSES, Document availability.

Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.)

    Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (16 
U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), provides that the Secretary shall insure that any 
action authorized, funded, or carried out is not likely to jeopardize 
the continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species 
or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical 
habitat. We conducted a formal consultation to ensure that actions 
resulting from these regulations will not likely jeopardize the 
continued existence of endangered or threatened species or result in 
the destruction or adverse modification of their critical habitat. 
Findings from this consultation are included in a biological opinion, 
which concludes that the regulations are not likely to jeopardize the 
continued existence of any endangered or threatened species. The 
biological opinion resulting from this section 7 consultation is part 
of the record for this rule and available for public inspection as 
provided in ADDRESSES, Document availability.

Regulatory Planning and Review (Executive Order (E.O.) 12866), 
Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review (E.O. 13563), and Unleashing 
Prosperity Through Deregulation (E.O. 14192)

    E.O. 12866 provides that the Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (OIRA) in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) reviews all 
significant rules as defined by that E.O. This rulemaking action will 
serve only to change the administrative process for authorizing States 
and Tribes to establish their regulations for migratory game bird 
hunting. OIRA has determined that this rule is significant under 
section 3(f) of E.O. 12866.
    E.O. 13563 reaffirms the principles of E.O. 12866 while calling for 
improvements in the Nation's regulatory system to promote 
predictability, to reduce uncertainty, and to use the best, most 
innovative, and least burdensome tools for achieving regulatory ends. 
E.O. 13653 directs agencies to consider regulatory approaches that 
reduce burdens and maintain flexibility and freedom of choice for the 
public where these approaches are relevant, feasible, and consistent 
with regulatory objectives. E.O. 13563 emphasizes further that 
regulations must be based on the best available science and that the 
rulemaking process must allow for public participation and an open 
exchange of ideas. By eliminating annual rulemaking, the Service will 
save about $80,000 per year in printing costs, reduce staff workload by 
at least 50 percent, and reduce 200 hours of managerial workload 
reviewing and surnaming documents.
    We have developed this direct final rule in a manner consistent 
with these requirements. This final rule is an E.O. 14192 deregulatory 
action.

Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.)

    Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), as 
amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act 
(SBREFA) of 1996 (Pub. L. 104-121)), whenever an agency is required to 
publish a notice of rulemaking for any proposed or final rule, it must 
prepare and make available for public comment a regulatory flexibility 
analysis that describes the effect of the rule on small businesses, 
small organizations, and small government jurisdictions. However, no 
regulatory flexibility analysis is required if the head of an agency 
certifies the rule will not have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities.
    We have examined this final rule's potential effects on small 
entities as required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act and determined 
that this action will not have an economic impact on any small 
entities. This final rule is administrative in nature, and the affected 
entities are State and Tribal governments. The rulemaking action 
changes only our internal administrative process for authorizing States 
and Tribes to establish seasonal migratory game bird hunting 
regulations. The annual process is largely a cooperative effort between 
the Service and the States. The change in our administrative process 
eliminates the need for annual rulemaking and is expected to increase 
efficiency; better meet State, Tribal, and Federal rulemaking 
constraints; and reduce the complexity and costs associated with 
promulgating annual migratory game bird hunting regulations.
    This is not a major rule under SBREFA (5 U.S.C. 804(2)). This 
direct final rule will not have an annual effect on the economy of $100 
million or more; will not cause a major increase in costs or prices for 
consumers, individual industries, or Federal, State, or local 
government agencies, or geographic regions; and will not have 
significant adverse effects on competition, employment, investment, 
productivity, innovation, or the ability of U.S.-based enterprises to 
compete with foreign-based enterprises.

Congressional Review Act

    Pursuant to subtitle E of the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement 
Fairness Act (also known as the Congressional Review Act or CRA, 5 
U.S.C. 801 et seq.), OIRA designated this action as a major rule, as 
defined by 5 U.S.C. 804(2), because it is likely to result in an annual 
effect on the economy of $100 million or more. However, because this 
final rule establishes a regulatory program for activity related to 
hunting and because hunting seasons are time sensitive, we establish 
the effective date of this final rule using the exemption in the CRA at 
5 U.S.C. 808(1).

Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.)

    This direct final rule does not contain any new collection of 
information that requires approval by the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501 
et seq.). OMB has previously approved the information collection 
requirements associated with migratory game bird surveys and the 
procedures for establishing annual migratory bird hunting seasons under 
the following OMB control numbers:
      1018-0019, ``North American Woodcock Singing Ground 
Survey'' (expires 02/28/2027).
      1018-0023, ``Migratory Bird Surveys, 50 CFR 20.20'' 
(expires 09/30/2028). Includes Migratory Bird Harvest Information 
Program, Migratory Bird Hunter Surveys, Sandhill Crane Survey, and 
Parts Collection Survey.

[[Page 38557]]

      1018-0171, ``Establishment of Annual Migratory Bird 
Hunting Seasons, 50 CFR part 20'' (expires 10/30/2027).
    You may view the information collection request(s) at  http://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/PRAMain . An agency may not conduct or 
sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of 
information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number.

Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (2 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.)

    We have determined and certify, in compliance with the requirements 
of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act, 2 U.S.C. 1502 et seq., that this 
final rulemaking does not include any Federal mandate that may result 
in the expenditure by State, local, and Tribal governments, in the 
aggregate, or by the private sector, of $100 million or more (adjusted 
for inflation) in any one year and does not significantly or uniquely 
affect small governments.

Civil Justice Reform (E.O. 12988)

    The Department, in promulgating this direct final rule, has 
determined that this rulemaking action will not unduly burden the 
judicial system and that it meets the requirements of sections 3(a) and 
3(b)(2) of E.O. 12988.

Takings Implication Assessment (E.O. 12630)

    In accordance with E.O. 12630, this direct final rule, authorized 
by the MBTA, does not have significant takings implications and does 
not affect any constitutionally protected property rights. This direct 
final rule will not result in the physical occupancy of property, the 
physical invasion of property, or the regulatory taking of any 
property. In fact, this final rulemaking action would allow hunters to 
exercise otherwise unavailable privileges and, therefore, will reduce 
restrictions on the use of private and public property.

Energy Effects (E.O. 13211)

    E.O. 13211 requires agencies to prepare statements of energy 
effects when undertaking certain actions. This rule is not likely to 
have a significant adverse effect on the supply, distribution, or use 
of energy and has not been designated by OIRA as a significant energy 
action. Therefore, no statement of energy effects is required.

Government-to-Government Relationship With Tribes

    In accordance with E.O. 13175 (``Consultation and Coordination with 
Native American Indian Tribal Governments'') and the Department of the 
Interior's manual at 512 DM 2, we considered possible effects of this 
direct final rule on federally recognized Indian Tribes with respect to 
impacts to Tribes' treaty rights to hunt waterfowl. We have determined 
that there are de minimis effects on Indian Tribes for that aspect of 
their treaty rights. Through this process to establish and announce 
authorization conditions for migratory game bird hunting, we regularly 
coordinate with Tribes that are affected. Tribes could attend spring 
and fall Flyway Council meetings, participate in SRC meetings, and 
provide comments on Federal Register publications concerning 
authorization conditions for migratory game bird hunting, and, whenever 
needed, we hold informal consultations with Tribes regarding trust 
resources, trust assets, health, and safety. This final rule will not 
have substantial direct effects on one or more Indian Tribes, on the 
relationship between the Federal Government and Indian Tribes, or on 
the distribution of power and responsibilities between the Federal 
Government and Indian Tribes.
    This direct final rule is administrative in nature and does not 
directly affect any specific Tribal lands, treaty rights, or Tribal 
trust resources. In addition, this direct final rule will not interfere 
with the ability of Tribes to manage themselves or their funds or to 
regulate migratory bird activities on Tribal lands. Therefore, we 
preliminarily conclude that this rulemaking action does not have 
``Tribal implications'' under section 1(a) of E.O. 13175. Thus, formal 
government-to-government consultation is not required by E.O. 13175 and 
related policies of the Department of the Interior. We will continue to 
collaborate with Tribes on concerns related to migratory game bird 
hunting regulations.
    We routinely provide Federal Register publications and biological 
status reports pertaining to migratory bird management, authorization 
conditions, and regulations online for all States and Tribes, and other 
interested parties. Upon being notified of any concern regarding 
proposed and final regulations, we have initiated consultation, and we 
will continue to consult with Tribes when necessary and requested by 
Tribes

Federalism Effects (E.O. 13132)

    Due to the migratory nature of certain species of birds, the 
Federal Government has been given responsibility over these species by 
the MBTA. We prescribe authorization conditions from which States and 
Tribes may establish their annual regulations for migratory game bird 
hunting seasons. This final rule changes only the Federal internal 
administrative process for establishing the authorization conditions 
and preserves the ability of the States and Tribes to establish hunting 
seasons that meet their individual needs. We maintain our regulations 
at 50 CFR 20.110 (Regulations for certain Federal Indian reservations 
and ceded lands) recognizing Tribal sovereignty to exercise reserved 
hunting rights and, for some Tribes, recognition of their authority to 
regulate hunting by both Tribal and nontribal members on their 
reservation. Consistent with our longstanding policy, we continue to 
recognize that, in certain cases, conflicts may arise between specific 
States and Tribes on aspects of Tribal treaty rights. The Service 
actively supports the parties reaching a mutually agreeable solution to 
such conflicts.
    Any State or Tribe may be more restrictive in its regulations than 
the Federal authorization conditions and regulations at any time. The 
authorization conditions are developed in a cooperative process with 
the States and the Flyway Councils. This process allows States to 
participate in the development of the authorization conditions from 
which they will establish their own hunting regulations. This final 
rule will not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the 
relationship between the national government and the States, or on the 
distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels of 
government. Therefore, in accordance with E.O. 13132, these regulations 
do not have federalism implications and do not warrant the preparation 
of a federalism summary impact statement.

Reference Cited

Lockie, S., and S. Rockloff. 2005. Decision Frameworks: Assessment of 
the social aspects of decision frameworks and development of a 
conceptual model. Coastal CRC Discussion Paper. Norman Gardens, 
Australia: Central Queensland University.

List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 20

    Exports, Hunting, Imports, Reporting and recordkeeping 
requirements, Transportation, Wildlife.

Regulation Promulgation

    Accordingly, for the reasons described in the preamble, the U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service is amending title 50, chapter I, subchapter 
B, part 20, of the

[[Page 38558]]

Code of Federal Regulations as set forth below:

PART 20--MIGRATORY BIRD HUNTING

0
1. The authority citation for part 20 is revised to read as follows:

    Authority: 16 U.S.C. 703 et seq. and 742a-j.

Subpart B--Definitions

0
2. Amend Sec.  20.11 by:
0
a. Revising the introductory text and paragraph (a) introductory text;
0
b. In paragraph (b)(1), removing the word ``precribed'' and adding in 
its place the word ``prescribed''; and
0
c. In paragraph (c)(5), removing the word ``aggegate'' and adding in 
its place the word ``aggregate''.
    These revisions read as follows:

Sec.  20.11  What terms do I need to understand?

    In addition to definitions contained in part 10 of this chapter, as 
used in this part, the following terms will be construed, respectively, 
to mean and to include:
    (a) Migratory game birds means those migratory birds included in 
the terms of conventions between the United States and any foreign 
country for the protection of migratory birds, for which hunting is 
authorized in this part and which belong to the following families:
* * * * *

Subpart C--Taking

0
3. Amend Sec.  20.21 by revising paragraphs (b)(2) and (g)(2) to read 
as follows:

Sec.  20.21  What hunting methods are illegal?

* * * * *
    (b) * * *
    (2) A hunting season only for Canada and cackling geese during the 
period of September 1 to September 30, provided:
    (i) The season occurs within the Atlantic, Central, and Mississippi 
Flyways (see Sec.  20.107 for definitions of the flyways);
    (ii) All other waterfowl and crane hunting seasons, excluding 
falconry, are closed; and
    (iii) The State notifies the Service's Migratory Bird Program by 
May 31 each year of its intention to authorize the additional hunting 
method in its regulations for the seasonal hunting of migratory game 
birds.
* * * * *
    (g) * * *
    (2) A hunting season only for Canada and cackling geese during the 
period of September 1 to September 30, provided:
    (i) The season occurs within the Atlantic, Central, and Mississippi 
Flyways (see Sec.  20.107 for definitions of the flyways);
    (ii) All other waterfowl and crane hunting seasons, excluding 
falconry, are closed; and
    (iii) The State notifies the Service's Migratory Bird Program by 
May 31 each year of its intention to authorize the additional hunting 
method in its regulations for the seasonal hunting of migratory game 
birds.
* * * * *

0
4. Revise Sec.  20.23 to read as follows:

Sec.  20.23  Shooting and hawking hours.

    No person may take migratory game birds except during the hours 
open to shooting, which includes hawking (taking by falconry), as 
prescribed in subpart K of this part and 50 CFR 21.180 and 21.183 of 
this chapter.

Subpart H--Federal, State, and Foreign Law

0
5. Revise Sec.  20.71 to read as follows:

Sec.  20.71  Violation of Federal law.

    No person shall at any time, by any means or in any manner, take, 
possess, transport, or export any migratory bird, or any part, nest, or 
egg of any such bird, in violation of any act of Congress or any 
regulation, including the regulations in this part and the 
authorization conditions (see Sec.  20.107 for a definition) for 
migratory bird hunting and in accordance with Sec.  20.125(a), issued 
pursuant thereto.

0
6. Revise Sec.  20.72 to read as follows:

Sec.  20.72  Violation of State and Tribal law.

    No person shall at any time, by any means or in any manner, take, 
possess, transport, or export any migratory bird, or any part, nest, or 
egg of any such bird, in violation of any applicable law or regulation 
of any State or Tribe. A violation of State or Tribal law or 
regulation, including State regulations in a Federal policy memorandum 
posted on a Service website, for migratory bird hunting constitutes a 
violation of Federal law.

0
7. Revise subpart K to read as follows:
Subpart K--Process for Issuing Authorization Conditions for Migratory 
Game Bird Hunting
Sec.
20.100 General provisions.
20.107 Definitions.
20.108 Nontoxic shot zones.
20.109 Extended seasons, limits, and hours for taking migratory game 
birds by falconry.
20.110 Regulations for certain Federal Indian reservations and ceded 
lands.
20.115 Duck and dove zone and split-season configurations.
20.117 Duck season regulatory alternatives.
20.119 Establishing the authorization conditions.
20.121 Notification of the authorization conditions.
20.123 Special and experimental seasons.
20.125 Requirements for States.
20.127 Requirements for hunters.
20.129 Service Migratory Bird Regulations Committee.
20.130 Flyway Councils.

Sec.  20.100  General provisions.

    (a) The taking, possession, transportation, and other uses of 
migratory birds is prohibited unless it is specifically provided for in 
regulations developed in accordance with the Migratory Bird Treaty Act. 
Consequently, migratory game bird hunting is prohibited except as 
authorized in regulations in this part and in accordance with the 
authorization conditions (see Sec.  20.107 for a definition) for State 
and Tribal migratory bird hunting regulations.
    (b) Authorization conditions will be based on data including, but 
not limited to, migratory game bird population status and trends, 
habitat conditions, and anticipated harvest. The authorization 
conditions will be periodically adjusted to account for bird abundance 
and other biological factors.
    (c) In the Atlantic Flyway States of Connecticut, Maine, Maryland, 
Massachusetts, New Jersey, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania, if Sunday 
hunting of migratory game birds is prohibited statewide by State law or 
regulation, all Sundays are closed to the take of all migratory game 
birds.

Sec.  20.107  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this subpart, the following terms will be 
construed, respectively, to mean and to include:
    Area means a federally established geographic boundary within which 
migratory game bird hunting may occur.
    Authorization conditions means the selected Federal regulatory 
alternatives from our decision frameworks within which States and 
Tribes may establish regulations for the seasonal hunting of migratory 
game birds in accordance with Federal regulations.
    (1) The selected regulatory alternatives may change periodically 
based on the status of populations and environmental conditions and 
will include the regulatory parameters most directly related to 
maintaining harvests at levels compatible with a game bird population's 
ability to be self-sustaining.
    (2) Authorization conditions specify the bracket dates, season 
lengths,

[[Page 38559]]

shooting hours, bag and possession limits, areas where hunting may 
occur, and other restrictions, conditions, and requirements associated 
with the seasonal hunting of migratory game birds.
    Bracket dates means the earliest and latest dates for migratory 
game bird hunting open seasons.
    Decision framework means a structured set of procedures, rules, 
models, and information criteria for selecting the appropriate 
authorization conditions from a fixed set of regulatory alternatives, 
each with a different expected harvest level, based on the harvest 
management objectives and status, demographics, and environmental 
conditions of the applicable migratory game bird population. Decision 
frameworks used by the Service are based on the U.S. Code and Code of 
Federal Regulations or published in the Federal Register as a final 
rule.
    Flyway means a geographically bounded administrative region.
    (1) Atlantic Flyway is Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, 
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, 
North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Vermont, 
Virginia, and West Virginia.
    (2) Mississippi Flyway is Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, 
Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, 
Ohio, Tennessee, and Wisconsin.
    (3) Central Flyway is Colorado (east of the Continental Divide), 
Kansas, Montana (Counties of Blaine, Carbon, Fergus, Judith Basin, 
Stillwater, Sweetgrass, Wheatland, and all counties east thereof), 
Nebraska, New Mexico (east of the Continental Divide except the 
Jicarilla Apache Indian Reservation), North Dakota, Oklahoma, South 
Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming (east of the Continental Divide).
    (4) Pacific Flyway is Arizona, California, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, 
Utah, Washington, and those portions of Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, 
and Wyoming not included in the Central Flyway.
    Flyway Council means the representatives from each State within 
that Flyway. Additionally, representatives from Puerto Rico and the 
U.S. Virgin Islands are included in the Atlantic Flyway Council, and 
representatives from Alaska are included in the Pacific Flyway Council.
    (1) The Council recommends actions necessary for science-based and 
sustainable harvest management of migratory birds to the Service.
    (2) The Flyway Councils are advised by the Flyway technical 
committees, which evaluate population and habitat information and make 
recommendations to the Councils on matters of migratory bird 
conservation.
    Hunting permit means a federally authorized, State-issued license 
authorizing specific limited take for hunting migratory game birds, 
valid only for the individual whose name and address appears on the 
authorization.
    Migratory Game Bird Hunting Memorandum means the policy memorandum 
that sets forth and communicates the authorization conditions within 
which States and Tribes may establish regulations for the seasonal 
hunting of migratory game birds in accordance with Federal regulations.
    Season length means the maximum number of days hunting may occur 
within the bracket dates for migratory game bird hunting seasons.
    Season segment means a consecutive-day period within the total 
season length for migratory game bird hunting seasons.
    Service Migratory Bird Regulations Committee means the Service 
Migratory Bird Regulations Committee (Service Regulations Committee or 
SRC), which is responsible for considering recommendations from the 
Service and Flyway Councils and recommending authorization conditions 
and modifications to decision frameworks and migratory game bird 
hunting regulations to the Director of the Service.
    Zone means a geographic contiguous boundary for which an 
independent hunting season for a species or group of species may be 
established to distribute hunting opportunities and harvests according 
to temporal, geographic, and demographic variability in game bird 
populations. Zones are established by States and approved by the 
Service.
    Zone and split-season configurations means an alternative 
combination of zones and season segments that a State may use for duck 
and dove hunting in a 5-year period, as provided in Sec.  20.115.

Sec.  20.108  Nontoxic shot zones.

    Beginning September 1, 1991, the contiguous 48 United States, and 
the States of Alaska and Hawaii, the Territories of Puerto Rico and the 
Virgin Islands, and the territorial waters of the United States, are 
designated for the purpose of Sec.  20.21(j) as nontoxic shot zones for 
hunting waterfowl, coots, and certain other species. ``Certain other 
species'' refers to those species, other than waterfowl or coots, that 
are affected by reason of being included in aggregate bags and 
concurrent seasons.

Sec.  20.109  Extended seasons, limits, and hours for taking migratory 
game birds by falconry.

    (a) In accordance with 50 CFR 21.82, falconry is a permitted means 
of taking migratory game birds in any State except for Hawaii. General 
hunting regulations, including seasons and shooting hours, apply to 
falconry.
    (b) States and Tribes may establish an extended season for taking 
migratory game birds in accordance with the following:
    (1) Bracket dates: September 1-March 10.
    (2) Season lengths: For all hunting methods combined, the combined 
length of the extended season, regular season, and any special or 
experimental seasons must not exceed 107 days for any species or group 
of species in a geographical area. Each extended season may be split 
into three segments.
    (3) Daily bag limits: Falconry daily bag limits for all permitted 
migratory game birds must not exceed 3 birds in the aggregate during 
extended falconry seasons, any special or experimental seasons, and 
regular hunting seasons in each State or Tribe, including those that do 
not establish an extended falconry season. Regular season bag limits do 
not apply to falconry. The falconry bag limit is not in addition to 
shooting limits.
    (4) Hawking hours: One-half hour before sunrise until sunset except 
as otherwise restricted by State or Tribal regulations.

Sec.  20.110  Regulations for certain Federal Indian reservations and 
ceded lands.

    (a) Tribal sovereignty. The Service recognizes Tribal sovereignty 
to exercise reserved hunting rights and, for some Tribes, recognition 
of their authority to regulate hunting by both Tribal and nontribal 
members on their reservation. Accordingly, Tribes may independently 
establish special (separate from the State or States in which the 
reservation is located) migratory game bird hunting regulations. 
Migratory birds may be taken if the take is consistent with the 
regulations in this section and applicable Tribal hunting regulations.
    (b) Applicability. Special Tribal migratory game bird hunting 
regulations may be established by Tribes that have reserved hunting 
rights on Federal Indian reservations (including off-reservation trust 
lands) and ceded lands. These regulations also may be applied to the 
establishment of migratory game bird hunting regulations for nontribal 
members on all lands within the reservations where Tribes have full

[[Page 38560]]

wildlife-management authority over such hunting, or where the Tribes 
and affected States otherwise have reached agreement over hunting by 
nontribal members on non-Indian lands within the reservation.
    (c) Special regulations. Special Tribal migratory game bird hunting 
regulations must be consistent with the annual March 11 to August 31 
closed season mandated by the 1916 Convention Between the United States 
and Great Britain (for Canada) for the Protection of Migratory Birds, 
as amended by the Protocol Between the Government of Canada and the 
Government of the United States of America Amending the 1916 Convention 
Between the United Kingdom and the United States of America for the 
Protection of Migratory Birds in Canada and the United States, and with 
these provisions:
    (1) Tribes may establish on-reservation hunting regulations, for 
both Tribal and nontribal members, with hunting seasons that may differ 
from those in the State(s) in which the reservations are located.
    (i) Regulations for both Tribal and nontribal members: Opening and 
closing dates, season length, and daily bag and possession limits for 
nontribal members on the reservations must be within the authorization 
conditions for migratory game bird hunting, and all Federal hunting 
regulations in this part also apply to nontribal hunters. Tribes may 
choose to set the same opening and closing dates, season length, and 
daily bag and possession limits for hunting by Tribal members and 
nontribal members on their reservations, or, in accordance with the 
provisions in paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section, Tribes may choose 
to establish regulations for Tribal members only.
    (ii) Regulations for Tribal members only: Tribes may establish on-
reservation hunting regulations by Tribal members only, with hunting 
regulations that may differ from the authorization conditions for 
bracket dates, season length, and daily bag and possession limits. All 
Federal hunting regulations in this part apply.
    (A) For a short-term experimental hunting season, a Tribe and the 
Service may formally agree on allowed methods of take, notwithstanding 
the regulations in Sec.  20.21, for on-reservation and ceded lands 
hunting by Tribal members. The Service will make public any such formal 
agreement.
    (B) A Tribe that would like to make an additional hunting method 
operational would need to provide data to the Service for 
consideration. If the Service agrees with the Tribe's proposal, the 
Service will conduct rulemaking to amend the regulations in this part 
to allow Tribal members to use the additional hunting method.
    (2) Tribes may establish off-reservation hunting regulations by 
Tribal members on ceded lands, with hunting seasons that may differ 
from the authorization conditions for season dates, season length, and 
daily bag and possession limits.
    (d) Provisions for ceded lands. Tribes that have special migratory 
game bird hunting regulations for Tribal members on ceded lands must 
send a copy of the Tribal regulations to officials in the affected 
State(s) as soon as reasonably possible prior to the season opening.

Sec.  20.115  Duck and dove zone and split-season configurations.

    The alternative combinations of zones and season segments that a 
State may use for duck and dove hunting in a 5-year period are 
described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. The SRC may 
approve a deviation from the 5-year period length for all four flyways.
    (a) Duck hunting zone and split-season configurations include:
    (1) One zone (same as no zones) with up to three season segments;
    (2) Two zones with up to two season segments in each zone;
    (3) Two zones with up to three season segments in each zone;
    (4) Three zones with up to two season segments in each zone; or
    (5) Four zones with a continuous season (i.e., no segments) in each 
zone.
    (b) Dove hunting zone and split-season configurations include:
    (1) One zone (same as no zones) with up to three season segments; 
or
    (2) Two zones with up to three season segments in each zone, except 
in the Western Management Unit where the season in one or both zones 
may be split into two segments.

Sec.  20.117  Duck season regulatory alternatives.

    For the general duck season authorization conditions, each Flyway 
has four possible regulatory alternatives (closed, restrictive, 
moderate, and liberal), each with a different expected harvest level. 
The open season alternatives are specified as:
    (a) For Atlantic Flyway:

                                            Table 1 to Paragraph (a)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Alternative
       Authorization conditions       --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Restrictive                Moderate                 Liberal
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bracket dates........................  Oct. 1-Jan. 31.........  Saturday nearest Sep.    Saturday nearest Sep.
                                                                 24-Jan. 31.              24-Jan. 31.
Season length (days).................  30.....................  45.....................  60.
Daily bag limit......................  3......................  6......................  6.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) For Mississippi Flyway:

                                            Table 2 to Paragraph (b)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Alternative
       Authorization conditions       --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Restrictive                Moderate                 Liberal
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bracket dates........................  Saturday nearest Sep.    Saturday nearest Sep.    Saturday nearest Sep.
                                        24-Jan. 31.              24-Jan. 31.              24-Jan. 31.
Season length (days).................  30.....................  45.....................  60.
Daily bag limit......................  3......................  6......................  6.
Mallard restriction..................  2......................  4......................  4.
Mallard female restriction...........  1......................  1......................  2.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 38561]]

    (c) For Central Flyway:

                                            Table 3 to Paragraph (c)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Alternative
       Authorization conditions       --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Restrictive                Moderate                 Liberal
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bracket dates........................  Saturday nearest Sep.    Saturday nearest Sep.    Saturday nearest Sep.
                                        24-Jan. 31.              24-Jan. 31.              24-Jan. 31.
Season length (days).................  39.....................  60.....................  74.
Daily bag limit......................  3......................  6......................  6.
Mallard restriction..................  3......................  5......................  5.
Mallard female restriction...........  1......................  1......................  2.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) For Pacific Flyway, except Alaska:

                                            Table 4 to Paragraph (d)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Alternative
       Authorization conditions       --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Restrictive                Moderate                 Liberal
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bracket dates........................  Saturday nearest Sep.    Saturday nearest Sep.    Saturday nearest Sep.
                                        24-Jan. 31.              24-Jan. 31.              24-Jan. 31.
Season length (days).................  60.....................  86.....................  107.
Daily bag limit......................  4......................  7......................  7.
Mallard restriction..................  3......................  5......................  7.
Mallard female restriction...........  1......................  2......................  2.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) For Alaska:

                                            Table 5 to Paragraph (e)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Alternative
       Authorization conditions       --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Restrictive                Moderate                 Liberal
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bracket dates........................  Sep. 1-Jan. 26.........  Sep. 1-Jan. 26.........  Sep. 1-Jan. 26.
Season length (days).................  107....................  107....................  107.
Daily bag limit......................  5, except Gulf Coast     7, except Gulf Coast     7, except Gulf Coast
                                        Zone is 6 and North      Zone is 8 and North      Zone is 8 and North
                                        Zone is 8.               Zone is 10.              Zone is 10.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (f) Shooting and hawking hours are from one-half hour before 
sunrise to sunset daily.
    (g) In the Central Flyway High Plains Mallard Management Unit, the 
season length may be extended 12 additional days in the restrictive 
alternative and 23 additional days in the moderate and liberal 
alternatives; additional days must be on or after the Saturday nearest 
December 10.
    (h) In the Pacific Flyway Columbia Basin Mallard Management Unit, 
the season length may be extended 7 additional days in the restrictive 
and moderate alternatives.
    (i) Additional species-specific restrictions may be established in 
the authorization conditions.
    (j) Duck season regulatory alternatives are fixed for a period of 
not less than 5 years.

Sec.  20.119  Establishing the authorization conditions.

    (a) The authorization conditions will be determined using available 
biological and habitat information and decision frameworks. A list of 
current decision frameworks is posted on the Service's website with the 
Migratory Game Bird Hunting Memorandum. The Service will apply 
available biological and habitat information to the relevant decision 
framework for that species and will announce the outcomes as the 
authorization conditions within which States and Tribes may establish 
their migratory game bird hunting regulations in accordance with the 
regulations in this part and other applicable Federal regulations.
    (b) Consistent with the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, the 
authorization conditions for any migratory game bird season must:
    (1) Not start prior to September 1;
    (2) Not end after March 10, except the season for ducks, 
mergansers, and coots may not end later than January 31 (16 U.S.C. 
704(c)(1)(B)); and
    (3) Not exceed 107 days.
    (c) The Service and Flyway Councils may establish decision 
frameworks for the determination of authorization conditions that are 
more restrictive than the provisions in the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.

Sec.  20.121  Notification of the authorization conditions.

    (a) The Service will communicate the authorization conditions in 
the Migratory Game Bird Hunting Memorandum. The memorandum and any 
supporting documentation will be made publicly available in the Federal 
Register through a notice of availability and posted on the Service's 
website.
    (b) The Service may update the Migratory Game Bird Hunting 
Memorandum and notice of availability annually if changes are 
prescribed by decision frameworks. Updates would occur no later than 
February 28 of each

[[Page 38562]]

calendar year. If the Service does not issue a new memorandum and 
notice of availability by February 28, then the authorization 
conditions in the most recent memorandum will remain in effect.
    (c) The notice of availability will open a public comment period of 
not less than 30 days. The Service may revise the Migratory Game Bird 
Hunting Memorandum based on public comment and, if so, the revised 
memorandum will be made publicly available in the Federal Register 
through a notice of availability and posted on the Service's website.

Sec.  20.123  Special and experimental seasons.

    (a) Special seasons authorize additional hunting opportunity 
outside the regular season but within the 107-day limit mandated by the 
MBTA. Special seasons are authorized to promote harvest of 
underutilized species, address overabundance of nuisance species, or 
provide special hunting opportunities. Experimental seasons are 
authorized to evaluate expansion of regular and special seasons to new 
areas, evaluate use of zones and splits, or evaluate alternative 
seasons.
    (b) Special or experimental season requests may be made by the 
Flyway Council(s) or requested by a State. Requests must be submitted 
by September 1 prior to the requested hunting season. If the Service 
approves a special or experimental season, it will be authorized in the 
Migratory Game Bird Hunting Memorandum.
    (c) To approve special and experimental seasons, the Service must 
find:
    (1) The Flyway Council(s) where the hunting will take place endorse 
the special or experimental season;
    (2) Species migration and distribution provide sufficient hunting 
opportunity outside the regular season;
    (3) There is no or negligible impact to nontarget species; and
    (4) Authorizations are consistent with existing environmental 
compliance determinations.
    (d) Approved experimental seasons may be valid for up to 5 years, 
after which a new request must be submitted. The Service may require 
implementing States to collect data for at least 3 years to assess the 
environmental effects of special or experimental seasons, including 
effects on target and nontarget species.

Sec.  20.125  Requirements for States.

    (a) States may authorize migratory game bird hunting provided the 
State establishes hunting regulations in accordance with Federal 
authorization conditions and regulations. State hunting regulations 
must be at least as restrictive as the Federal authorization conditions 
and regulations. Hunting that occurs outside the State regulations or 
Federal authorization conditions and regulations constitutes a 
violation of Federal law pursuant to Sec.  20.71.
    (b) No later than May 31 of each calendar year, States must submit 
their proposed migratory game bird hunting regulations implementing the 
Federal authorization conditions to the Service's Migratory Bird 
Program for review.
    (c) Areas and zones for which open seasons are specified in a 
State's hunting regulations must be described, delineated, and 
designated as such in each State's hunting regulations, and these areas 
must also be included in the Migratory Game Bird Hunting Memorandum.
    (d) Unless otherwise specified, States may establish hunting 
seasons by zones as defined in Sec.  20.107. Zones for certain duck 
seasons (and associated youth and veterans-active military waterfowl 
hunting days, gallinule seasons, and snipe seasons) and dove seasons 
must comply with Federal zone and split-season configurations. Changes 
among configurations may occur in the first year of the 5-year period 
that it would apply and according to the following guidelines:
    (1) States seeking to change their duck or dove hunting zone and 
split-season configuration selection must provide their selection and 
zone descriptions to the Service by August 31 of the year prior to the 
5-year interval during which they would apply.
    (2) States with approved special case arrangements to change their 
zone and split-season configuration must conform to the current 
configurations and may not revert to the special case arrangements that 
they previously had in place.
    (3) Only minor (less than one county in size) zone boundary changes 
will be allowed for any special case arrangement, and such changes are 
allowed only in the first year of the 5-year period during which it 
would apply.
    (4) Minor (less than one county in size) zone boundary changes may 
be allowed for any State to resolve law enforcement or other boundary 
clarification issues resulting from implication of a new configuration. 
Changes will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and must be approved 
by the respective Flyway Council and the Service Migratory Bird 
Regulations Committee.
    (5) Consideration of changes for management-unit boundaries is not 
subject to the guidelines and provisions governing the use of zones and 
split seasons for ducks and doves.
    (e) States may issue hunting permits for migratory game bird 
hunting at levels predicted to result in the amount of take authorized 
by the authorization conditions. Federally authorized, State-issued 
hunting permits are valid only for the individual whose name and 
address appears on the hunting permit and must specify a take 
authorization.
    (f) States may select 2 days per duck-hunting zone, designated as 
``Youth Waterfowl Hunting Days,'' and 2 days per duck-hunting zone, 
designated as ``Veterans and Active Military Personnel Waterfowl 
Hunting Days,'' in addition to their regular duck seasons.
    (1) The days may be held concurrently or may be nonconsecutive. 
Days may be held up to 14 days before or after any regular duck-season 
bracket dates in the authorization conditions or within any split of a 
regular duck season, or within any other open season on migratory game 
birds. Youth Waterfowl Hunting Days must be held outside any regular 
duck season on weekends, holidays, or other non-school days when youth 
hunters would have the maximum opportunity to participate.
    (2) Youth hunters must be younger than 18 years of age. States may 
specify a more restrictive age definition. An adult 18 years of age or 
older must accompany the youth hunter into the field. This adult may 
not duck hunt but may participate in other seasons that are open on the 
special youth day. Permitted species may be taken only by participants 
possessing applicable hunting permits.
    (3) Veterans (as defined in 38 U.S.C. 101) and members of the U.S. 
Armed Forces on active duty, including members of the National Guard 
and Reserves on active duty (other than for training), may participate. 
Permitted species may be taken only by participants possessing 
applicable hunting permits.

Sec.  20.127  Requirements for hunters.

    (a) Any individual hunting must comply with the regulations in this 
part, Federal authorization conditions, and any applicable State or 
Tribal hunting regulations. Violation of any applicable Federal, State, 
Tribal, or local law or regulation is a violation of Federal law 
pursuant to Sec.  20.71 and Sec.  20.72.
    (b) Any individual hunting under a federally authorized, State-
issued hunting permit must adhere to the provisions of the hunting 
permit,

[[Page 38563]]

Federal regulations, and State regulations. The hunting permit must be 
carried by the permittee when exercising the provisions of the hunting 
permit and must be presented to any law enforcement officer upon 
request. The hunting permit specifies the individual's name and 
address. The hunting permit is not transferable or assignable to any 
other person, and may not be sold, bartered, traded, or otherwise 
provided to any other person. The hunting permit will be invalid if it 
is altered or defaced in any way.

Sec.  20.129  Service Migratory Bird Regulations Committee.

    (a) Purpose. The Service Migratory Bird Regulations Committee 
(Service Regulations Committee or SRC) is responsible for considering 
recommendations from the Service and Flyway Councils and recommending 
authorization conditions and modifications to decision frameworks and 
regulations for migratory game bird hunting to the Director of the 
Service.
    (b) Notice of meetings. Some SRC meetings may be attended by any 
person outside the Department of the Interior. Notices of these 
meetings will be published on the Service's Migratory Bird Program 
website at least 2 weeks before the meeting. The notice will state the 
time, place, and general subject(s) of the meeting, as well as the 
extent of public involvement such as observation, written comment, or 
participation. Minutes will be maintained for each meeting of the SRC 
for which notice is published.
    (c) Public observation and written comment. Each meeting of the SRC 
for which notice is published will be open to the public for 
observation, and the public may submit written comments to the 
Service's Migratory Bird Program at least 1 week prior to the meeting.

Sec.  20.130  Flyway Councils.

    Notice of each meeting of a Flyway Council to be attended by any 
official of the Department of the Interior will be announced online on 
the Service's Migratory Bird Program website at least 2 weeks before 
the meeting or as soon as practicable after the Department of the 
Interior learns of the meeting. The notice will state the time, place, 
and general subject(s) of the meeting.

Subpart L--Administrative and Miscellaneous Provisions

0
8. Revise Sec.  20.133 to read as follows:

Sec.  20.133  Hunting regulations for crows.

    (a) Crows may be taken, possessed, transported, exported, or 
imported, only in accordance with such laws or regulations as may be 
prescribed by a State or Tribe pursuant to this section.
    (b) Except in the State of Hawaii, where take of crows is 
prohibited, States and Tribes may by statute or regulation prescribe a 
hunting season for crows. Such State and Tribal statutes or regulations 
may set forth the method of taking, the bag and possession limits, the 
dates and duration of the hunting season, and such other regulations as 
may be deemed appropriate, subject to the following limitations for 
each State or Tribe:
    (1) Crows must not be hunted from aircraft;
    (2) The hunting season or seasons on crows must not exceed a total 
of 124 days during a calendar year;
    (3) Hunting must not be permitted during the peak crow nesting 
period within a State; and
    (4) Crows may be taken only by firearms, bow and arrow, and 
falconry.

Subpart N [Removed and Reserved]

0
9. Remove and reserve subpart N, which consists of Sec.  20.151 through 
Sec.  20.155.

Kevin Lilly,
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks, 
Exercising the Delegated Authority of the Assistant Secretary for Fish 
and Wildlife and Parks.
[FR Doc. 2026-12951 Filed 6-25-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4333-15-P