[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 126 (Thursday, July 2, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 40426-40434]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-13451]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Administration for Children and Families

45 CFR Part 1351

RIN 0970-AD37

Reducing Bureaucracy and Burden for Children, Youth, and Family 
Programs

AGENCY: Family and Youth Services Bureau (FYSB), Administration on 
Children, Youth and Families (ACYF), Administration for Children and 
Families (ACF), Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: This final rule removes duplicative and unnecessary sections 
from the Runaway and Homeless Youth Program regulations. These 
amendments will streamline the Runaway and Homeless Youth Program 
regulations to make them more accessible to the public.

DATES: Effective August 31, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Adam N. Jones, Deputy Chief of Staff, 
Immediate Office of the Assistant Secretary, Administration for 
Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services, 
Washington, DC 202-417-0115 or   [email&#160;protected]  . A plain 
language summary of the final rule is posted at  https://www.regulations.gov .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Statutory Authority

    This final rule is being issued under the authority granted to the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services by the Runaway and Homeless 
Youth Act of 1974, as amended, hereafter referred to as the ``Act,'' 34 
U.S.C. 11201 et seq. 34 U.S.C. 11202 specifically authorizes 
rulemaking.

II. Background

    The Runaway and Homeless Youth (RHY) Program, authorized under the 
Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (34 U.S.C. 11201 et seq.), authorizes 
HHS to provide grants to public and nonprofit private entities to 
deliver services to runaway and homeless youth and youth at risk of 
homelessness. The RHY program includes the Basic Center Program, the 
Transitional Living Program (including the Maternity Group Home 
Program), and the Street Outreach Program, which together support 
emergency shelter, transitional housing, outreach, counseling, and 
comprehensive supportive services to promote youth safety, well-being, 
and long-term stability. The RHY program also funds a national 
communications system, grants for training and technical assistance, 
and grants for research, evaluation, training, and service projects. 
HHS has issued regulations for the RHY Program at 45 CFR part 1351.
    HHS initially published regulations for the RHY Program on November 
20, 1978. Office of Human Development Services, Department of Health, 
Education, and Welfare, 43 FR 55634 (Nov. 20, 1978) (codified at 45 CFR 
pt. 1351). The regulations were most recently amended on December 20, 
2016 at Runaway and Homeless Youth, 81 FR 93030. The most recent 
revisions added program performance standards and provided additional 
updates to reflect changes in the RHY Act made through the Reconnecting 
Homeless Youth Act of 2008 (Pub. L. 110-378). See Runaway and Homeless 
Youth, 81 FR 93030, 93030 (Dec. 20, 2016). We are now rescinding 
several sections of 45 CFR part 1351 to clarify program requirements, 
reduce unnecessary administrative burden, and better align the 
regulations with current statutory authority and language, while 
maintaining program operations and effective management of grant funds.

III. Executive Summary

    This final rule rescinds multiple RHY Program regulation sections 
that can be delineated into two categories: those that are duplicative 
and those that are unnecessary because they are better suited for a 
different format.
    The duplicative regulation sections are those that carry no legal 
weight because their requirements are listed elsewhere in applicable 
law, such as in statute. Duplicative regulations impose no new 
obligations and offer no new guidance because the authority and 
requirements are pulled directly from other statutes and regulations. 
In many cases, the language in the regulation is identical to the 
language in the RHY Act.
    Several of the regulation sections are better suited to a different 
format, such as a Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO). These sections 
either include summaries of program goals or objectives that do not 
impose any requirements beyond the language in the authorizing statute 
or they include information generally found in grant documents such as 
NOFOs. In some cases, the sections merely direct grant applicants and 
recipients to follow instructions in NOFOs and provide no additional 
information. These sections are being removed to allow them to be 
published in the more appropriate format.

Effective Date

    This final rule will become effective 60 days from the date of its 
publication.

Severability

    The purpose of this section is to clarify ACF's intent with respect 
to the severability of the provisions of this NPRM. As explained above, 
ACF is removing sections of the RHY regulations because we determined 
that doing so would make the regulations

[[Page 40427]]

clearer, less burdensome, and more accessible to the public. To the 
extent that any portion of the removals are declared invalid by a 
court, ACF intends for all other provisions of this final rule to 
remain in effect to the greatest extent possible to ensure that the RHY 
regulations remain as concise and accessible as possible. The changes 
address a variety of issues relevant to the Family and Youth Services 
Bureau. None of the provisions contained herein are central to an 
overall intent of the proposed rule, nor are any provisions being 
removed in this final rule dependent on the validity of other, separate 
provisions.

IV. Summary of Public Comments

    ACF published a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) in the Federal 
Register on April 6, 2026, (91 FR 17235) proposing revisions to 45 CFR 
part 1351. ACF provided a 30-day comment period during which interested 
parties could submit comments in writing electronically through 
 Regulations.gov  or via email to the Immediate Office of the Assistant 
Secretary.
    During the 30-day comment period, ACF received 918 comments from 
individuals and organizations including students and clergy; human 
services, educational, and medical professionals; national, state and 
local runaway and homeless youth focused advocacy organizations, 
research and policy organizations; and individual provider 
organizations. All comments received were posted on 
 www.regulations.gov .
    Of the 918 submissions received, there were 537 unique comments and 
381 are duplicates. Additionally, of the 537 unique comments received, 
506 of the comments raise the same concerns about the NPRM with minor 
distinguishing details describing commenters' personal experiences.. 
Comments were received from national organizations, advocating on 
behalf of runaway and homeless youth and RHY service providers.
    At the conclusion of the public comment period, ACF analyzed the 
content of the comments to inform the development of this final rule. 
To support the analysis of public comments, ACF staff used a large 
language model, a type of artificial intelligence (AI), as a tool to 
conduct an initial scan of comment content, sentiment, and language. 
The AI output was thoroughly analyzed and refined by FYSB program 
subject matter experts. All comments were reviewed by content experts 
to determine each commenter's support, opposition, or suggestions 
concerning the policies proposed in the NPRM.
    Public comments reflected a range of perspectives, with some 
commenters expressing general support for the proposed changes and the 
majority opposing the proposed rescissions. All responsive comments 
informed our consideration of the final rule.
    The preamble in this final rule discusses the changes to current 
regulations. Where language of previous regulations remains unchanged, 
the preamble explanation and interpretation of that language published 
with all prior final rules are also retained, unless specifically 
modified in the preamble to this rule.

V. General Comments and Cross-Cutting Issues

    A couple comments expressed overall support for the proposed 
changes in the NPRM but did not discuss specific provisions or make any 
suggestions for change. Several comments expressed opposition to the 
proposed changes but made no specific suggestions for change. We 
address the general concerns raised in those comments in this section. 
Comments addressing specific sections of the regulation proposed for 
removal are discussed in the section-by-section analysis later in this 
final rule. Several commenters expressed concern that removing the 
regulation sections discussed in the NPRM could weaken consistency of 
RHY program requirements and limits stakeholders' ability to hold the 
agency accountable for enforcing consistent standards. Commenters 
raising this issue were primarily advocacy organizations supporting 
runaway and homeless youth providers and youth at risk of homelessness 
or who are experiencing homelessness. While we acknowledge commenters' 
concerns, we do not agree that the proposed rescissions will create 
inconsistencies in program requirements or enforcement. Most of the 
regulation sections slated for removal either impose no requirements or 
merely list program requirements already articulated in the RHY statute 
at 34 U.S.C. 11201 et seq. or other in federal regulations. See, e.g., 
45 CFR 1351.10 (summarizing the RHY program purpose but including no 
program requirements); 1351.11 (restating program eligibility 
requirements listed at Sections 11211(a)(1), 11222, and 11261(a) of the 
RHY Act). Where regulatory language differs from statute, such 
distinctions may be included in NOFOs without creating inconsistencies 
in program requirements or limiting enforcement. Grant application 
reviewers are fully trained on new provisions that may be added to 
NOFOs, and applicants are encouraged to contact RHY program staff 
listed in the NOFO with any questions about NOFO content. NOFOs are 
publicly available and may be easily accessed by any stakeholders 
seeking to better understand RHY program requirements. Importantly, RHY 
program-specific performance standards, the basis for most enforcement 
actions, remain intact. See 45 CFR 1351.30 through 32. ACF declines to 
make any changes to the proposed rescissions based on commenter 
concerns about consistency.
    Many commenters, primarily representing advocacy organizations, 
also raised general concerns that the proposed section removals will 
weaken RHY program clarity and transparency. We acknowledge these 
concerns but disagree. Removing repetitive sections of the regulation 
and sections that are better suited for NOFOs makes the remaining 
regulation sections clearer and easier to follow. RHY stakeholders will 
no longer need to parse out minor distinctions between statute and 
regulation to understand program requirements because the RHY 
regulation will be limited to requirements that are not articulated 
elsewhere and that carry legal weight rather than, for example, 
directing grant applicants to follow instructions in the funding 
opportunity announcement (NOFO) to apply for RHY funding. See 45 CFR 
1351.17. ACF will therefore decline to make any changes to the proposed 
removals based on commenter concerns about clarity or transparency.
    Most individual commenters, as well the advocacy organizations that 
opposed the NPRM, argued that the changes will reduce protections for 
vulnerable youth, particularly youth who identify as ``LGBTQ.'' Many of 
these commenters emphasized negative consequences associated with 
``conversion therapy'' and protecting youth identifying as ``LGBTQ'' 
from harm. Commenters raised concerns that the proposed recissions will 
discourage such youth from seeking RHY-funded services. While most of 
these comments do not cite a specific section of the RHY regulations, 
we recognize that these sentiments likely respond to ACF's proposal to 
remove 45 CFR 1351.16 from regulation. 45 CFR 1351.16(b) prohibits 
grant recipients from using RHY funds for ``any treatment or referral 
to treatment that aims to change someone's sexual orientation, gender 
identity or gender expression,'' a practice commonly referred to as 
conversion therapy. We will address general comments about protections 
for these individuals in this section and provide a more detailed 
analysis of

[[Page 40428]]

concerns about removing Sec.  1351.16(b) in in the section-by-section 
discussion.
    ACF maintains that the proposed removals will have no impact on 
protections for vulnerable youth, including youth who identify as 
``LGBTQ.'' ACF does not discriminate against any individual or group 
based on any Federally protected classification, including in the 
administration of the RHY Program. Services are provided to all 
eligible youth consistent with applicable Federal civil rights laws and 
program requirements.
    Nothing in this rule alters or limits existing nondiscrimination 
protections or the obligation of recipients to provide safe and 
appropriate services to all youth served under the program. ACF remains 
committed to serving all eligible youth per statutory requirements, 
including youth who are at risk for trafficking, exploitation, and 
housing instability. We disagree that the proposed rescissions will 
discourage youth participation. RHY programs, including the Basic 
Center Program and the Transitional Living Program, must include 
outreach efforts in accordance with the RHY Act. See 34 U.S.C. 
11212(b)(6) (Basic Center Program), 34 U.S.C. 11222(a)(8). ACF will 
continue to support RHY grant recipients to enhance outreach efforts 
through guidance and technical assistance in partnership with the 
Runaway and Homeless Youth Training, Technical Assistance, and Capacity 
Building Center (RHYTTAC).
    Because the proposed recissions do not weaken protections for 
vulnerable youth or discourage eligible youth from participating in 
RHY-funded programming, ACF declines to make any changes to the NPRM 
based on these commenter concerns.

VI. Section-by-Section Discussion of Comments and Regulatory Provisions

    HHS received the following comments about changes proposed to 
specific subparts of the regulation. Below, HHS identifies each 
subpart, summarizes the comments, and responds to them accordingly.

Subpart B--Runaway and Homeless Youth Program Grants

Sec.  1351.10 What is the purpose of Runaway and Homeless Youth Program 
grants?
    This section is proposed for removal because it is unnecessary. 
This section explains the general purpose of RHY Program grants but 
provides no instructions to grant applicants or recipients, nor does it 
impose any new obligations. Thus, this section is not needed in 
regulation and would better serve grant applicants and recipients if it 
were moved into the opening of a Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) 
and described elsewhere in sub-regulatory guidance.
    Comment: HHS received six comments, all of which were from advocacy 
organizations, opposing the removal of Sec.  1351.10 arguing that the 
section provides foundational regulatory direction on the purpose of 
RHY grants, the youth population served, and key service expectations 
that should not be shifted into annual NOFOs. Commenters argued that 
Sec.  1351.10 helps anchor the program by identifying core approaches 
such as Positive Youth Development, services tailored to youth needs, 
and connections to education and employment, and they argue that 
removing it could weaken consistency, reduce legal clarity, and erode 
explicit protections for youth facing barriers to safe services.
    Response: While we recognize the value in providing ``foundational 
regulatory direction'' for RHY grants, we maintain that this section of 
the RHY regulation may be removed without impact. As explained above, 
this section provides no clarifying instructions to grant applicants or 
recipients, nor does it impose any new obligations. Its removal from 
regulation cannot jeopardize ``explicit protections'' for youth because 
this section does not create any new protections. As recipients of 
Federal Financial Assistance (FFA), all RHY grant recipients must 
ensure that the programs they administer do not discriminate on the 
basis of a participant protected characteristics, including the 
participant's race, sex, ethnicity, national origin, religion, or 
disability. See 45 CFR 200.300. These protections are enshrined 
elsewhere in Federal statute and regulation and this section does not 
affect their applicability.
Sec.  1351.11 Who is eligible to apply for a Runaway and Homeless Youth 
Program grant?
    This section discusses eligibility for RHY Program grants. We are 
removing it from RHY regulations because it generally duplicates 
statutory language. This section is not needed in regulation because 
the statute that authorizes this section (Sections 11211(a)(1), 11222, 
and 11261(a) of the RHY Act) is already prescriptive in terms of 
eligibility for grant funds and the regulatory language does not 
provide additional clarification.
    Comment: HHS received three comments addressing removal of Sec.  
1351.11 from the RHY regulations. One commenter supported the removal 
of this section because it appears duplicative and adds little clarity. 
The other two comments, opposed removal, arguing the regulation is 
still needed because it clarifies who may apply for RHY grants and 
preserves the program's boundary with the juvenile justice system. The 
opposing comments say that the RHY statute does not clearly articulate 
applicant eligibility, so the regulation confirms that public agencies, 
private nonprofits, and coordinated networks can participate, while 
juvenile justice systems cannot; they also warn that removing the 
section could create confusion for existing grantees, including faith-
based organizations.
    Response: ACF acknowledges the importance of ensuring that grant 
applicants and recipients understand eligibility requirements but 
disagrees that removing this section will cause confusion. This section 
of the RHY regulations was most recently updated to more closely align 
with statutory requirements rather than to add new content not found in 
statute. See Runaway and Homeless Youth, 81 FR 93030, 93041 (Dec. 20, 
2016) (``[W]e proposed changes to this section to confirm the 
regulatory language to the current statute.''). While the prohibition 
against awarding RHY grants to entities within the juvenile justice 
system is not explicitly included in the RHY statute, the statute does, 
as commenters note, make clear that the intent of the RHY program is to 
develop an ``effective system of care . . . outside the welfare system 
and the law enforcement system.'' 34 U.S.C. 11201(4). Furthermore, ACF 
ensures that each fiscal year NOFO clearly defines who eligible 
applicants are and, when appropriate, cites specific eligibility 
criteria provided in RHY Act. Consulting NOFOs, as all grant applicants 
and recipients must do to receive funding, will also assist faith-based 
organizations to understand their eligibility. All RHY NOFOs include 
specific language clarifying that faith-based organizations that 
otherwise meet eligibility requirements may apply for funding. 
Referring applicants and grant recipients to all eligibility 
requirements and restrictions in one place, such as the NOFO, will 
reduce administrative burden for prospective awardees and will avoid, 
rather than cause confusion.

[[Page 40429]]

Sec.  1351.12 Who gets priority for the award of a Runaway and Homeless 
Youth Program grant?
    This section discusses which applicants receive priority for the 
RHY Program grant awards. We are removing this section from regulation 
because it is largely duplicative of statutory text from the RHY Act. 
In most cases, the language used in this regulation section is 
identical to the language describing grant eligibility requirements in 
the statute. See 34 U.S.C. 11213(b) (priority requirements for the 
Basic Center Program); 34 U.S.C. 11222(b) (priority requirements for 
the Transitional Living Program); 34 U.S.C. 11261(b) (priority 
requirements for the Street Outreach Program); 34 U.S.C. 11231 
(priority requirements for the national communications system) 34 
U.S.C. 11243(b) (priority requirements for research, evaluation, 
demonstration and service projects).
    Where the regulatory language has modified statutory language 
slightly, such as at 45 CFR 1351.12(d) (expanding the statutory 
requirement for the national communications grant to prioritize 
applicants with experience providing telephonic services to runaway and 
homeless youth to prioritize applicants who have experience providing 
``electronic communication services''), distinctions can be explained 
via NOFO. NOFOs can likewise appropriately articulate 45 CFR 
1351.12(f), which requires the Secretary to incorporate program 
performance standards listed at 45 CFR 1351.30 through 32 into 
grantmaking, monitoring, and evaluation. This subsection already states 
that NOFOs will include such content.
    Comment: HHS received three comments addressing the removal of 
Sec.  1351.12. One commenter supported removal and agreed that the 
regulation section does not add new information or clarity to the 
statutory requirements concerning applicant priorities. The other two 
commenters, which were organizations representing a collection of 
stakeholders, argued that certain subsections add meaningful 
clarification that should be retained, especially language allowing 
flexibility on preferred Basic Center Program (BCP) award amounts, 
broadening priority for the national communications system beyond 
telephone services to include internet, mobile, and other technology-
driven services, and preserving the regulatory requirement to 
incorporate performance standards into NOFOs, monitoring, and 
evaluation. A commenter also expressed concern that the phrase ``or 
such figure as Congress may specify'' would no longer appear in 
regulation following the requirement that ACF prioritize applicants 
requesting $200,000 or less in funding.
    Response: As explained above, most of the language in this section 
``mirrors the statutory language exactly.'' Runaway and Homeless Youth, 
81 FR 93030, 93041 (Dec. 20, 2016). ACF disagrees that the minor 
distinctions between statutory and regulatory language concerning 
priorities justify retaining this section of the RHY regulation. ACF 
has already incorporated the regulatory language that differs from 
statute at 45 CFR 1351.12(d) and (f) into NOFOs. The NOFO supporting 
the National Communication System has been revised to ensure services 
meet modern communication technologies to include adding text and chat 
functionality, which were not envisioned when the RHY Act was first 
introduced. ACF recognizes The RHY Performance Standards remain 
enshrined in regulation and grant recipients must agree to adhere to 
the Performance Standards to accept RHY funds. Additionally, removing 
the phrase ``or such figure as Congress may specify'' has no impact on 
the statutory requirement to prioritize applicants seeking $200,000 or 
less; Congress always has authority to modify statutory requirements, 
and removing this section from regulation allows ACF to respond more 
efficiently if Congress does raise the amount specified in the RHY Act. 
For these reasons, we decline to make any changes to the proposal to 
remove this section from regulation. Sec.  1351.13 What are the Federal 
and non-Federal match requirements under a Runaway and Homeless Youth 
Program grant?
    This section discusses match requirements for RHY Program grants. 
We are removing this section from the RHY regulation because it 
duplicates statutory match requirements almost exactly. See 34 U.S.C. 
11274. This section does not assist the public to better understand the 
statutory match requirement and therefore serves no purpose.
    Comment: HHS received one comment supporting removal of Sec.  
1351.13 but no specific rationale was provided.
    Response: Both the RHY statute and annual NOFOs effectively 
communicate that the federal share of each funded project is 90 percent 
of the total project cost, and the remaining 10 percent must be met by 
the grant recipient.
Sec.  1351.14 What is the period for which a grant will be awarded?
    This section discusses the grant period for RHY Program grants. We 
are removing this section because it is unnecessary. Information about 
grant periods already appears in NOFOs and is better suited there. 
Furthermore, this Section is ambiguous because it states, ``generally 
the grant will initially be for one year.'' Corresponding language in 
NOFOs is therefore already necessary to inform grant applicants and 
recipients about the specific period of their grants. NOFO language 
communicates that grants are awarded as a three year period of 
performance with three distinct one-year budget periods.
    Comments: ACF received three comments opposing the removal of Sec.  
1351.14 arguing that the section still serves an important operational 
purpose by giving stable regulatory direction for NOFO development and 
grantee expectations, even when NOFOs vary from year to year. The 
commenters emphasize subsection (b), which details the duration of 
grants, arguing that it adds useful guidance on continuation awards by 
making clear that multi-year grants should be reviewed annually for 
satisfactory performance, essential for outcomes, accountability, and 
responsible use of limited RHY funds.
    Response: ACF agrees that providing clear information about grant 
duration is important but declines to make any changes to our proposal 
to remove this section from regulation. RHY NOFOs provide sufficient 
clarity about project periods, deeming this section unnecessary. 
Additionally, we do not anticipate that removal of this section will 
have any impact on grant recipient performance or accountability. ACF 
ensures responsible use of RHY Program funds by utilizing a robust 
monitoring process that includes desk and onsite reviews of grant 
recipients' compliance with program requirements and performance 
standards. RHY grant recipients are also required to submit client-
level and performance data through established reporting processes, 
including quarterly Runaway and Homeless Youth--Homeless Management 
Information System (RHY-HMIS) uploads, Performance Progress Reports 
(PPRs), and other required reporting. Information gathered through 
monitoring and data reporting may be used in decisions about future RHY 
funding opportunities. Applicants are expected to look to NOFOs for 
relevant grant terms, and centralizing requirements in one place will 
reduce the administrative burden on applicants.

[[Page 40430]]

Sec.  1351.15 What costs are supportable under a Runaway and Homeless 
Youth Program grant?
    This section discusses allowable costs for RHY Program grants. We 
are removing this section because grant terms and conditions, including 
allowable expenditures of a grant, are best suited for NOFOs and other 
grant documents and in most cases, already appear in those documents. 
Including them in regulation is unnecessary.
    Comment: We received four comments, all of which came from advocacy 
organizations, specific to Sec.  1351.15. The commenters opposed 
removal and argued that the section should remain in regulation because 
it gives stable guidance on allowable costs, including support for 
staff training, and helps providers plan, budget, and maintain 
consistent services across grant cycles. Commenters said that this 
clarity is especially important for smaller and community-based RHY 
grant recipients that rely on regulatory language for fiscal decision-
making, staff onboarding, compliance, and audit defense, and they raise 
concerns that moving cost rules only into NOFOs could create confusion, 
inconsistency, and service instability from year to year.
    Response: ACF acknowledges commenter sentiment about the importance 
of providing clear, consistent guidance to grant recipients, 
particularly small, community-based grant recipients, about allowable 
program costs. We do not agree, however, that removing this section of 
the RHY regulation will negatively impact grant recipient access to 
such information. Grant terms and conditions, including allowable 
expenditures of a grant, are already included in NOFOs and other grant 
documents. Grant recipients will already be looking to NOFOs for 
relevant terms, and to win future awards, are incentivized to use 
awarded funds in the most efficient manner. In addition, grant 
recipients must meet the terms and conditions of their Federal award.
    Furthermore, while Sec.  1351.15 includes several examples of 
allowable costs for RHY programs, the list is not exhaustive. Rather, 
all Federal grant recipients are bound by cost principles outlined in 2 
CFR part 200, subpart E, which require all allowable costs to be 
necessary, reasonable, and allocable the grant award. See 2 CFR 
200.403-405. Retaining Sec.  1351.15 in regulation would still require 
RHY grant recipients to determine whether unlisted costs meet these 
Federal cost allocation standards, so its removal does not impose a 
burden on grant recipients or create additional confusion. For these 
reasons, we will proceed with removing this section from RHY 
regulations.
Sec.  1351.16 What costs are not allowable under a Runaway and Homeless 
Youth Program grant?
    This section discusses unallowable costs for RHY Program grants. As 
with 45 CFR 1351.15, we are removing this section because grant terms 
and conditions, including lists of unallowable expenditures of a grant, 
are best suited for NOFOs and other grant documents. NOFOs already 
include lists of unallowable expenses, including those listed in this 
section.
    This section is also duplicative in part. 45 CFR 1351.1 already 
prohibits the activities described in 45 CFR 1351.16(b) under the 
definitions of ``counseling services'' and ``health care services,'' 
there is no need to include the same expense prohibition repeatedly in 
the RHY regulations.
    Comments: Most of the comments that we received on the NPRM either 
directly or indirectly raised concerns about removing Sec.  1351.16 
from regulation, particularly Sec.  1351.16(b). Seven advocacy 
organizations opposed removal of this section. These commenters 
expressed general concerns about removing regulatory guidance on 
unallowable costs, asserting that the section provides stable, 
practical guidance on allowable and unallowable costs that grant 
recipients--especially smaller community-based organizations--use for 
budgeting, compliance, training, and audits. One commenter reasoned 
that ACF's decision to include a limitation on using RHY funds for 
constructing or operating existing facilities that are used ``partially 
or incidentally'' for RHY services in the 2016 Final Rule was because 
grant applicants had proposed inappropriate budgets due to unclear 
NOFOs, so retaining this section in regulation was necessary to 
preserve clarity.
    As discussed above, most commenters opposed removing Sec.  
1351.16(b), arguing that this subsection's explicit prohibition on 
efforts to change a young person's ``sexual orientation, gender 
identity or gender expression'' is a critical youth safety protection 
that should not be weakened or left to NOFO language alone. Many 
commenter contend that including this prohibition in the definition 
section of the RHY regulation (45 CFR 1351.1) is insufficient, because 
the funding prohibition included in the definition of ``counseling 
services'' may not fully cover harmful conduct by non-clinical staff., 
Commenters expressed concern that removing Sec.  1351.16 could create 
confusion, increase compliance risk, and discourage vulnerable youth, 
particularly those identifying as ``LGBTQ,'' from seeking services. 
Some commenters also viewed removal of this subsection as an 
endorsement of conversion therapy, or ``a treatment that aims to change 
someone's sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression.''
    Response: We recognize that our proposal to remove Sec.  1351.16 
from RHY regulations raises concerns for some commenters. Nonetheless, 
we disagree that removing this section will create instability for 
grant applicants and recipients or that it will erode protections for 
vulnerable youth. We offer the following explanations for our decision 
to proceed with removal.
    First, as with Sec.  1351.15, grant terms and conditions, including 
unallowable expenditures of a grant, are already included in NOFOs and 
other grant documents. Grant applicants and recipients must rely on 
NOFOs to understand the terms of their grant, and providing clear, 
detailed information about allowable and unallowable expenses in NOFOs 
is the best way to ensure that grant applicants and recipients receive 
all relevant information. While commenters pointed to earlier unclear 
NOFOs as the 2016 RHY Final Rule's justification for including 
limitations on using capital and operating costs for facilities only 
partially or incidentally used for RHY programs, the Final Rule draws 
no such conclusion. See Runaway and Homeless Youth, 81 FR 93030, 93042-
43 (Dec. 20, 2016). Rather, the Final Rule states that ACF has ``seen 
proposed project budgets that include disproportionate allocations of 
facility-wide or overhead costs to Runaway and Homeless Youth projects 
that use only a small proportion of the facility.'' Id. We maintain 
that NOFOs are the most appropriate place to explain limitations on 
capital and operating costs with RHY funds. Additionally, ACF has since 
undergone significant efforts in recent years to ensure that NOFOs are 
simple, clear, and accessible to grant applicants. See 89 FR 30046. 
Even if funding opportunity announcements were insufficient to provide 
applicants with clear funding guidance when the 2016 Final Rule was 
published, ACF's updated efforts to streamline NOFOs will ensure that 
grant applicants and recipients receive a clear explanation of 
allowable and unallowable expenses without the need to include this 
information in regulation.

[[Page 40431]]

    Further, as with Sec.  1351.15, the list of unallowable expenses in 
Sec.  1351.16 is not exhaustive; the section lists only two examples of 
unallowable expenses under the RHY program. Yet, all Federal grant 
recipients are bound by cost principles outlined in 2 CFR part 200, 
subpart E, which includes a long list of specific unallowable costs not 
referenced in the RHY regulations. Grant recipients must still confirm 
that all costs are allowable under Part 200, Subpart E, so Sec.  
1351.16's presence in the RHY regulations creates, rather than reduces 
burden for grant recipients.
    We next address commenter concerns about removing Sec.  1351.16(b) 
from RHY regulations and the impact that such removal would have on 
vulnerable youth, including those who identify as ``LGBTQ.'' Sec.  
1351.16(b) was added to the RHY regulations in the 2016 Final Rule 
based on one commenter's request to specifically prohibit conversion 
therapy. ACF responded that ``[w]e are not aware of any instance where 
any RHY grantee has used `conversion therapy' or `reparative therapy' 
to aim to change an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity. 
However, we agree it would be wholly inappropriate for this to take 
place and are amending this final rule to explicitly exclude, by 
definition, conversion therapy from allowable services and health care 
services. Additionally, we have revised the final rule by adding a new 
Sec.  1351.16(b) . . . .'' Runaway and Homeless Youth, 81 FR 93030, 
93045 (Dec. 20, 2016).
    As explained in the 2016 Final Rule, Sec.  1351.16(b) is not the 
only place in regulation that a prohibition on using RHY funds for 
conversion therapy appears. Both the definition of ``counseling 
services'' and the definition of ``health care services'' explicitly 
prohibit ``any treatment or referral to treatment that aims to change 
someone's sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.'' 
See 45 CFR 1351.1. The prohibition against using RHY funds remains 
enshrined in regulation. Removing Sec.  1351.16(b) therefore cannot and 
should not be viewed as an endorsement of conversion therapy, nor will 
it weaken protections for vulnerable youth. ACF remains unaware of any 
instance when RHY funds have been used for conversion therapy, and we 
maintain that the prohibitions in Sec.  1351.1, which include referrals 
for such services, are sufficient to prevent grant recipients from 
using RHY funds for this purpose even when non-clinical staff are 
involved.
Sec.  1351.17 How is application made for a Runaway and Homeless Youth 
Program grant?
    This section discusses the process of applying for RHY Program 
grants. This section is removed as it is unnecessary; it merely directs 
grant applicants to follow the instructions in the NOFO (references in 
regulation as ``funding opportunity announcements'') without further 
detail or clarification.
    Comments: ACF received one comment opposed to the removal of Sec.  
1351.17 arguing that removal will lead to the destabilization of 
services and confusion related to requirements. The comment raised 
concerns that annual changes in NOFO content could be confusing for 
programs applying to and receiving RHY grants.
    Response: We acknowledge the commenter's concerns but disagree that 
removing this section from the RHY regulations will cause any confusion 
or destabilization. Sec.  1351.17 provides no substantive guidance and 
instructs applicants to ``follow instructions included in the funding 
opportunity announcement, which describe procedures for receipt and 
review of applications.'' The section directs applicants to follow the 
NOFO, which they are already obligated to do. Because NOFOs are issued 
on an annual basis and may vary from year to year, applicants are 
expected to review the instructions for preparing an application and 
the specific requirements set forth in the NOFO applicable to the 
relevant fiscal year when preparing their submissions. We will proceed 
with removing this section from the RHY regulations.

Subpart C--Additional Requirements

Sec.  1351.20 What Government-wide and HHS-wide regulations apply to 
these programs?
    This section is removed because it is duplicative. The section 
restates a list of Federal regulations applicable to RHY grant 
recipients and subrecipients without explanation of why each regulation 
is flagged yet excludes other Federal regulations that apply to all 
grant recipients and subrecipients. See Runaway and Homeless Youth, 81 
FR 93030, 93044-45 (Dec. 20, 2016) (``This new list does not attempt to 
list all of the Federal laws and regulations . . . that pertain to 
organizations that may be grant awardees.''). The listed regulations 
apply to RHY grant recipients and subrecipients (and in many cases, all 
HHS or Federal agency grant recipients and subrecipients) regardless of 
whether they are included in the RHY regulations, and the arbitrary 
nature by which the listed regulations were selected for inclusion 
demonstrates further that this section serves no purpose.
    Comment: ACF received two comments regarding the removal of Sec.  
1351.20, one supporting removal and one opposing removal. The 
supporting commenter agreed that the protections detailed in the list 
of government-wide and HHS-wide regulations can be found elsewhere. A 
national advocacy organization opposed removal of this section because 
it contended that Sec.  1351.20 serves as a centralized reminder of RHY 
grant recipients' civil rights and nondiscrimination responsibilities. 
The commenter argued that deleting this section could reduce clarity on 
legal obligations applicants and signal less emphasis on civil rights 
compliance even if the underlying legal obligations still remain. The 
opposing commenter expressed concern that removing this regulation 
would threaten civil rights entirely without regulation to create 
enforcement.
    Response: We agree that grant applicants and recipients must 
clearly understand their legal obligations but disagree that removing 
this section will make such obligations more difficult to understand. 
All Federal grant recipients, including RHY grant recipients, are 
required to adhere to all applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements regardless of whether they are expressly stated in the 
program regulation. See 2 CFR 200.300. Applicable civil rights laws are 
also incorporated in all ACF NOFOs and in the ACF Standard Terms and 
Conditions, incorporated into Notices of Awards for all ACF 
discretionary grant recipients, including all RHY grant recipients. See 
ACF Standard Terms and Conditions,  https://acf.gov/grants/manage-grant/grant-award/award-terms . As such, we will remove Sec.  1351.20 from 
regulation.
Sec.  1351.24 What are the additional requirements that the Basic 
Center Program grantees must meet?
    This section discusses requirements for the Basic Center Program 
(BCP). This section is removed because it is unnecessary. Grant 
requirements are better suited for NOFOs or other grant documents, such 
as supplemental terms and conditions. Further, this section already 
directs grant applicants and recipients to the NOFO (referred to as the 
``funding opportunity announcement'') for additional requirements, 
making any guidance provided by the regulation incomplete. See 45 CFR 
1351.24(f).
    Comment: ACF received eight comments, all from advocacy

[[Page 40432]]

organizations, opposing the removal of Sec.  1351.24 arguing that it 
sets the core, legally enforceable baseline for BCP operations and 
should not be shifted into NOFOs that may change from year to year. 
Commenters noted that Sec.  1351.24 provides stable program 
requirements for crisis response and service quality, including 24/7 
intake and shelter access, trauma-informed practice, services for youth 
and families both inside and outside the shelter setting, and prompt 
family reunification efforts; they argued that removing it could create 
confusion, inconsistency, and weaker accountability for grant 
recipients across funding cycles. One commenter expressed concerns that 
moving the requirements in Sec.  1351.24 to NOFOs could result in 
future administrations eliminating the service requirements and 
expectations.
    Response: We agree with commenters that clear program requirements 
are necessary for grant recipients to effectively carry out the BCP and 
other RHY grant programs, but we disagree that regulation is the best 
place for these requirements and, as such, decline to change our 
proposal to remove this section from RHY regulations. The requirements 
articulated in Sec.  1351.24 are rooted in the RHY statute, so they 
will not become, as one commenter contends, ``entirely discretionary'' 
if they are moved to the BCP NOFO. The RHY Act requires BCP grant 
recipients to ``develop adequate plans for contacting the parents or 
other relatives of the youth and ensuring the safe return of the youth 
according to the best interests of the youth, for contacting local 
government officials pursuant to informal arrangements established with 
such officials by the runaway and homeless youth center and for 
providing for other appropriate alternative living arrangements.'' 34 
U.S.C. 11212(b)(3). The Act also requires BCP grant recipients to 
``develop an adequate plan for providing counseling and aftercare 
services to such youth, for encouraging the involvement of their 
parents or legal guardians in counseling, and for ensuring, as 
possible, that aftercare services will be provided to those youth who 
are returned beyond the State in which the runaway and homeless youth 
center is located.'' 34 U.S.C. 11212(b)(5). The requirements in Sec.  
1351.24 provide more detail than the statutory mandates but may be 
appropriately moved to NOFOs. Because the requirements are closely tied 
to the statute, commenter concerns that future administrations may 
fundamentally change them once they are moved to NOFOs are unfounded. 
Additionally, centralizing requirements in the NOFO reduces the burden 
for applicants, who must already review NOFOs in the regular course of 
applying for grants, to fulfill both best practice and grant 
requirements.
Sec.  1351.25 What are the additional requirements that the 
Transitional Living Program and Maternity Group Home grantees must 
meet?
    This section discusses additional requirements for the Transitional 
Living Program (TLP) and Maternity Group Home (MGH) grant. This section 
is removed because it is unnecessary. Grant requirements are better 
suited for NOFOs or other grant documents, such as supplemental terms 
and conditions. Further, this section already directs grant applicants 
and recipients to the NOFO (referred to as the ``funding opportunity 
announcement'') for additional requirements, making any guidance 
provided by the regulation incomplete. See 45 CFR 1351.25(b).
    Comment: ACF received eight comments, all from legal and advocacy 
organizations, opposing the removal of Sec.  1351.25 arguing that it 
provides an essential regulatory floor for TLP and MGH requirements. As 
with comments concerning Sec.  1351.24, commenters asserted that 
removing these requirements from regulation and shifting them to NOFOs 
would create instability, confusion, and uneven expectations across 
funding cycles, while weakening the consistent minimum standards that 
RHY grant recipients rely on for service delivery, compliance, and 
partnership coordination. Several of the commenters stated that TLP 
requirements should remain explicit because they define the core model 
of care for youth, including supportive services tied to long-term 
stability, and that consolidation would blur important distinctions 
between RHY program types.
    Response: We acknowledge commenter concerns about the importance of 
the requirements in this section and recognize the necessity of 
providing consistent, comprehensive guidance for TLP and MGH grant 
implementation. Nonetheless, we disagree that moving these requirements 
to NOFOs will create instability, inconsistency, or otherwise weaken 
RHY grant requirements and intend to remove this section of regulation. 
Like the BCP requirements in Sec.  1351.24, the TLP and MGH 
requirements listed in this section expand on requirements in the RHY 
Act. See 34 U.S.C. 11222(a). The differences between the statutory and 
regulatory requirements are minimal enough that NOFOs are an 
appropriate mechanism for providing the additional details currently 
available in Sec.  1351.25. ACF maintains that such grant requirements 
are better suited for NOFOs or other grant documents than regulations. 
Additionally, centralizing requirements in one location, such as the 
NOFO, reduces the burden for applicants to fulfill both best practice 
and grant requirement.
Sec.  1351.27 What are the additional requirements that the Street 
Outreach Program grantees must meet?
    This section discusses requirements for Street Outreach Program 
(SOP). This section is removed because it is unnecessary. Grant 
requirements are better suited for NOFOs or other grant documents, such 
as supplemental terms and conditions. Further, this Section already 
directs grant applicants and recipients to the NOFO (referred to as the 
``funding opportunity announcement'') for additional requirements, 
making any guidance provided by the regulation incomplete. See 45 CFR 
1351.27(c).
    Comment: Eight commenters, all of which were advocacy or legal 
organizations, oppose removal and describe the section as an important 
regulatory anchor for the SOP. Commenters argue that it clarifies the 
distinct purpose of the SOP in relation to other RHY programs, keeps 
core duties explicit, such as helping youth leave the streets, make 
safer choices, build trust, and connect to shelter and services, and 
preserves a consistent minimum standard that should not be left solely 
to changing NOFO language. Several of these commenters also argue that 
removing Sec.  1351.27 could create inconsistent expectations across 
funding cycles and weaken accountability for serving vulnerable youth. 
One commenter, a national advocacy organization representing several 
stakeholders, noted that the requirements listed in Sec.  1351.27 are 
not listed in the RHY Act.
    Response: We recognize the importance of distinguishing the SOP 
from other RHY grant programs and the necessity of listing core duties 
for the program, but we disagree that removing Sec.  1351.27 from the 
RHY regulations will have the negative impact that the commenters 
contemplate. We will proceed with removing this section from the RHY 
regulations. As with Sec. Sec.  1351.24 and 1351.25, ACF maintains that 
grant requirements are better suited for NOFOs or other grant 
documents, such as supplemental terms and conditions. ACF can still 
ensure that grant applicants and recipients recognize SOP's unique role 
in the RHY Program if its program requirements are listed in

[[Page 40433]]

NOFOs rather than in regulation, and, while NOFOs may change annually, 
we do not believe commenter concerns that program requirements will 
become unstable as a result is justified.
    The statutory authorization for the SOP is less specific than the 
authorization for the BCP, TLP, and MGH programs. 34 U.S.C. 11261, 
which authorizes the SOP, does not include detail for the kinds of 
services that grant recipients must provide beyond a directive to 
provide ``street-based services to runaway and homeless, and street 
youth, who have been subjected to, or are at risk of being subjected 
to, sexual abuse, prostitution, sexual exploitation, severe forms of 
trafficking in persons (as defined in section 7102(9) of Title 22), or 
sex trafficking (as defined in section 7102(10) of Title 22).'' Yet, 
while Sec.  1351.27 provides more detail about what the required 
``street-based services'' must include, such as ``services designed to 
assist clients in leaving the streets, making healthy choices, and 
building trusted relationships,'' the regulation section still leaves 
significant ambiguity about the nature of such services and how those 
services should be delivered. Including the requirements listed in 
Sec.  1351.27 in NOFOs instead of regulation will therefore not weaken 
RHY program requirements or jeopardize the standards of the SOP.

VIII. Regulatory Process Matters

Paperwork Reduction Act

    Under the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq., as 
amended) (PRA), all Departments are required to submit to the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) for review and approval any reporting or 
recordkeeping requirements inherent in a proposed or final rule. This 
final rule does not contain any information requiring OMB approval 
under the PRA and, therefore, will not create any new paperwork burdens 
or modify existing burdens subject to OMB review.

Executive Order 13132

    Executive Order 13132 requires federal agencies to consult with 
State and local government officials if they develop regulatory 
policies with federalism implications. Federalism is rooted in the 
belief that issues that are not national in scope or significance are 
most appropriately addressed by the level of government close to the 
people. This final rule does not have substantial direct impact on the 
States, on the relationship between the federal government and the 
States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the 
various levels of government. This final rule does not pre-empt State 
law. The sections the final rule is removing are duplicative and 
unnecessary regulations from the Family and Youth Services Bureau 
rules. Therefore, in accordance with Section 6 of Executive Order 
13132, it is determined that this action does not have sufficient 
federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a federalism 
summary impact statement.
Assessment of Federal Regulations and Policies on Families
    Assessment of Federal Regulations and Policies on Families Section 
654 of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act of 1999 
(Pub. L. 105-277) requires federal agencies to determine whether a 
policy or regulation may negatively affect family well-being. If the 
agency determines a policy or regulation negatively affects family 
well-being, then the agency must prepare an impact assessment 
addressing seven criteria specified in the law. ACF believes it is not 
necessary to prepare a family policymaking assessment because the 
actions in this final rule will not have any impact on the autonomy or 
integrity of the family as an institution.

IX. Regulatory Impact Analysis

    We have examined the impacts of the proposed rule under Executive 
Order 12866, Executive Order 13563, Executive Order 14192, the 
Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612), and the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 104-4).
    Executive Orders 12866 and 13563 direct us to assess all benefits 
and costs of available regulatory alternatives and, when regulation is 
necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits. 
Rules are ``significant'' under Executive Order 12866 Section 3(f)(1) 
if they ``have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more; 
or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector of the 
economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public 
health or safety, or State, local or tribal governments or 
communities.'' Executive Order 14192 requires that any new incremental 
costs associated with significant new regulations ``shall, to the 
extent permitted by law, be offset by the elimination of existing costs 
associated with at least ten prior regulations.'' The Office of 
Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) has determined that this 
final rule is not a significant action under Executive Order 12866 
Section 3(f).
    The Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) requires agencies to consider 
the impact of their regulatory proposals on small entities. Because 
this is simply repealing obsolete and unnecessary language, we certify 
that the final rule does not have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities.
    The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (UMRA) generally requires 
that each agency conduct a cost-benefit analysis; identify and consider 
a reasonable number of regulatory alternatives; and select the least 
costly, most cost effective, or least burdensome alternative that 
achieves the objectives of the rule before promulgating any proposed or 
final rule that includes a Federal mandate that may result in 
expenditures of more than $100 million (adjusted for inflation) in at 
least one year by State, local, and tribal governments, in the 
aggregate, or by the private sector. Each agency issuing a rule with 
relevant effects over that threshold must also seek input from State, 
local, and tribal governments. The current threshold after adjustment 
for inflation is $193 million, using the most current (2005) Implicit 
Price Deflator for the Gross Domestic Product. This final rule would 
not result in an expenditure in any year that meets or exceeds this 
amount.

VII. Tribal Consultation Statement

    Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian 
Tribal Governments, requires agencies to consult with Indian Tribes 
when regulations have ``substantial direct effects on one or more 
Indian Tribes, on the relationship between the Federal Government and 
Indian Tribes, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities 
between the Federal Government and Indian Tribes.'' Similarly, ACF's 
Tribal Consultation Policy says that consultation is triggered for any 
legislative proposal, new rule adoption, or other policy change that 
significantly affects Tribes, meaning there exists a reasonable 
presumption that it has or may have substantial direct effects on one 
or more Indian Tribes, on the relationship between the Federal 
Government and Indian tribes, on the amount or duration of ACF program 
funding, on the delivery of ACF programs or services to one or more 
Indian Tribes, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities 
between the Federal Government and Indian Tribes.

List of Subjects in 45 CFR Part 1351

    Administrative practice and procedure, Grant programs--social 
programs, Homeless, Reporting and

[[Page 40434]]

recordkeeping requirements, Technical assistance, Youth.

    For the reasons set forth in the preamble, ACF amends 45 CFR part 
1351 as follows:

PART 1351--RUNAWAY AND HOMELESS YOUTH PROGRAM

0
1. The authority citation for part 1351 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  42 U.S.C. 5701.

Sec. Sec.  1351.10, 1351.11, 1351.12, 1351.13, 1351.14, 1351.15, 
1351.16, 1351.17, 1351.20, 1351.24, 1351.25, and 1351.27  [Removed and 
Reserved]

0
2. Sections 1351.10, 1351.11, 1351.12, 1351.13, 1351.14, 1351.15, 
1351.16, 1351.17, 1351.20, 1351.24, 1351.25, and 1351.27 are removed 
and reserved.

Robert F. Kennedy, Jr.,
Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services.
[FR Doc. 2026-13451 Filed 7-1-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4184-33-P