[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 126 (Thursday, July 2, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 40372-40381]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-13371]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

Office of the Secretary of Labor

29 CFR Part 31

RIN 1291-AA49

Rescinding Portions of Department of Labor Title VI Regulations

AGENCY: Office of the Secretary, Labor.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Department of Labor (``Department'') amends its 
regulations implementing Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
(``Title VI'') to eliminate disparate-impact liability. These 
amendments align the Department's regulations with Title VI's original 
public meaning, avoid constitutional concerns, reduce compliance costs, 
and serve the public interest.

DATES: Effective July 2, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Naomi Barry-Perez, Director, Civil 
Rights Center (CRC), U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue 
NW, Room N-4123, Washington, DC 20210. Telephone: (202) 693-6500 
(voice) (this is not a toll-free number). If you are deaf, hard of 
hearing, or have a speech disability, please dial 7-1-1 to access 
telecommunications relay services.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Executive Summary

    The Department is rescinding portions of its regulations 
promulgated pursuant to Title VI, 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, to more closely 
align those regulations with Title VI's original public meaning, avoid 
constitutional concerns, reduce compliance costs, and better serve the 
public interest. In addition, these revisions conform to Executive 
Order 14281, Restoring Equality of Opportunity and Meritocracy, 90 FR 
17537 (Apr. 23, 2025), and Executive Order 14173, Ending Illegal 
Discrimination and Restoring Merit-Based Opportunity, 90 FR 8633 (Jan. 
31, 2025), but the Department adopts this rulemaking independent of 
Executive Order 14281 and Executive Order 14173. First, this rule 
rescinds the full text of 29 CFR 31.3(b)(2), which currently prohibits 
the utilization of ``criteria or methods of administration which have 
the effect of subjecting

[[Page 40373]]

individuals to discrimination because of race, color or national origin 
. . . .'' Second, this rule removes the two uses of the phrase ``or 
effect'' from 29 CFR 31.3(b)(3). Third, this rule rescinds the full 
text of 29 CFR 31.3(b)(6), which requires affirmative action in certain 
circumstances. Fourth, this rule rescinds the full text of 29 CFR 
31.3(c)(2), which addresses employment practices subject to Federal 
financial assistance. Fifth, this rule makes technical edits to delete 
references to the now-revoked Executive Order 11246, Equal Opportunity 
Employment, 30 FR 12319 (Sep. 28, 1965), at 29 CFR 31.12(a)(1) and 
31.3(c)(3). Finally, this rule deletes 29 CFR 31.3(d) in its entirety 
because that section contains references to program names that are now 
obsolete and employment practices only covered by Sec.  31.3(c)(2), 
thus rendering it confusing and unhelpful to recipients of Federal 
financial assistance.
    This rule makes clear that the Department's Title VI regulations do 
not prohibit conduct or activities solely on the basis that they have 
an unintentional disparate impact.

II. Discussion

A. Statutory and Regulatory History

    Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, provides: 
``No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, 
or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the 
benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or 
activity receiving Federal financial assistance.'' 42 U.S.C. 2000d. 
Title VI also directs Federal departments and agencies that extend 
Federal financial assistance to ``effectuate the provisions of'' Title 
VI ``by issuing rules, regulations, or orders of general 
applicability.'' 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1. The section of Title VI that sets 
forth the prohibited conduct, 42 U.S.C. 2000d, prohibits only 
intentional discrimination and makes no reference to disparate impact.
    Shortly after Title VI was enacted, on December 4, 1964, the then-
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare issued the initial set of 
model regulations for Title VI. These model regulations included a 
provision that recipients of Federal funds may not use ``criteria or 
methods of administration which have the effect of subjecting 
individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national 
origin.'' See 29 FR 16298, 16299 (Dec. 4, 1964).
    Concurrently with the model regulations, the Department promulgated 
its Title VI regulations. See 29 FR 16284 (Dec. 4, 1964). Like the 
model regulations, the Department's Title VI regulations prohibited 
recipients of Federal financial assistance from administering programs 
in a manner that has the effect of subjecting individuals to 
discrimination based on race, color, or national origin. See id.
    The Department of Justice (``DOJ'') adopted these model regulations 
in 1966. 31 FR 10265, 10266 (July 29, 1966). On December 10, 2025, DOJ 
amended its Title VI regulations to eliminate disparate-impact 
liability. DOJ's rule noted that ``[b]ecause of the Department's unique 
role in the interpretation and enforcement of Title VI . . . [DOJ] 
expects that this rule will cause other Federal departments and 
agencies to consider similarly revising their Title VI regulations.'' 
See Rescinding Portions of Department of Justice Title VI Regulations 
To Conform More Closely With the Statutory Text and To Implement 
Executive Order 14281, 90 FR 57141 (Dec. 10, 2025).
    The Department's implementing regulations describing the scope of 
prohibited discriminatory conduct, 29 CFR 31.3, currently include 
prohibitions on conduct that has an unintentional disparate impact.

B. Relevant Supreme Court Decisions

    In 1978, the Supreme Court held that Congress intended Title VI to 
prohibit ``only those racial classifications that would violate the 
Equal Protection Clause'' if committed by a government actor. Regents 
of Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 287 (1978) (Powell, J., 
announcing judgment); id. at 325, 328, 352 (Brennan, J., joined by 
White, Marshall, and Blackmun, JJ., concurring in part). Just prior to 
Bakke, the Supreme Court held that the Equal Protection Clause 
prohibits only intentional discrimination, and that discriminatory 
effect or disparate impact alone does not constitute a violation of the 
Equal Protection Clause. Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 242 (1976) 
(finding Equal Protection Clause requires a showing of discriminatory 
intent); see also Vill. of Arlington Heights v. Metro. Hous. Dev. 
Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 265 (1977) (``Proof of racially discriminatory 
intent or purpose is required to show a violation of the Equal 
Protection Clause.''); Personnel Admin. of Mass. v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 
256, 272 (1979) (``[E]ven if a neutral law has a disproportionately 
adverse effect upon a racial minority, it is unconstitutional under the 
Equal Protection Clause only if that impact can be traced to a 
discriminatory purpose.''). Taken together, these Supreme Court cases 
confirm that Title VI's statutory prohibition extends only to 
intentional discrimination.
    In 2001, the Supreme Court reaffirmed that understanding in 
Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 280-81 (2001). In Sandoval, the 
Supreme Court held that private plaintiffs could not bring a Title VI 
action to enforce DOJ's implementing regulation prohibiting 
unintentional disparate impact because the statutory provisions of 
Title VI prohibited only intentional discrimination. Although the 
Supreme Court in Sandoval assumed, without deciding, that DOJ's 
disparate-impact regulation was valid, the Court wrote that the 
regulation was in ``considerable tension'' with the Supreme Court's 
Title VI precedents. Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 281-82, 284-85.
    The Supreme Court's Sandoval decision has led to a divergence 
between Title VI enforcement by private plaintiffs and Federal 
departments and agencies. Private plaintiffs can enforce only Title 
VI's statutory prohibition on intentional discrimination. Federal 
departments and agencies, however, can enforce both the statutory 
prohibition on intentional discrimination and the much broader 
disparate-impact regulations. The Sandoval decision has also sparked 
uncertainty as to the future of disparate-impact regulations 
promulgated by nearly every Federal department and agency.
    The divergence between private litigation and agency enforcement is 
especially unsustainable after the Supreme Court overruled Chevron 
U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 
(1984). See Loper Bright Enters. v. Raimondo, 603 U.S. 369, 409-12 
(2024). In reaching that result, the Supreme Court made clear that 
``statutes . . . have a single, best meaning'' that is `` `fixed at the 
time of enactment.' '' Id. at 400 (quoting Wis. Cent. Ltd. v. United 
States, 585 U.S. 274, 284 (2018)). ``That is the whole point of having 
written statutes,'' the Supreme Court explained. Id. Thus, Title VI's 
bar on discrimination can have only one meaning. And under Supreme 
Court precedent, the single, best meaning of Title VI is that it 
``prohibits only intentional discrimination'' and ``permits'' facially 
neutral policies that result in disparate outcomes so long as there is 
no discriminatory intent. Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 280, 286 n.6.

C. Executive Order 14281

    On April 23, 2025, the President issued Executive Order 14281. This 
Order restated the ``bedrock principle of the United States . . . that 
all citizens are treated equally under the law.'' 90

[[Page 40374]]

FR at 17537. The Order explained that this ``principle guarantees 
equality of opportunity, not equal outcomes,'' and ``promises that 
people are treated as individuals, not components of a particular race 
or group.'' Id. The Order also explained that disparate-impact 
liability ``endangers this foundational principle'' because it ``all 
but requires individuals and businesses to consider race and engage in 
racial balancing to avoid potentially crippling legal liability.'' Id. 
As the Order explained, disparate-impact liability ``not only 
undermines our national values, but also runs contrary to equal 
protection under the law and, therefore, violates our Constitution.'' 
Id. The Order relayed that ``[i]t is the policy of the United States to 
eliminate the use of disparate-impact liability in all contexts to the 
maximum degree possible to avoid violating the Constitution, Federal 
civil rights laws, and basic American ideals.'' Id. Section 5 of the 
Order directed the Attorney General to ``initiate appropriate action to 
repeal or amend the implementing regulations for Title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 for all agencies to the extent they contemplate 
disparate-impact liability.'' Id.
    The Attorney General promulgated a final rule revising DOJ's Title 
VI regulations to remove disparate-impact liability on December 10, 
2025. 90 FR 57151. The rule explained that DOJ would take this action 
independent of Executive Order 14281. Id. at 57143. In support of the 
rule, DOJ cited the ``bedrock principles'' of equality of opportunity, 
individual merit, and a colorblind society. The rule concluded that 
disparate-impact liability endangers these principles, raises 
constitutional concerns, conflicts with Title VI's original meaning, 
creates confusion, increases costs, and is not in the public interest. 
Id. at 57143-44. The rule explained that each of these reasons 
independently supports its elimination. Id. at 57143-45. DOJ considered 
alternatives, including a modified version of disparate-impact 
liability, but concluded that any version of disparate-impact liability 
would be inconsistent with Title VI's original public meaning. Id. at 
57144-45. And DOJ concluded that the regulatory ``extension of 
prohibited conduct to include conduct with an unintentional disparate 
impact reaches a vastly broader scope than the statute itself,'' that 
``[t]his scope is too broad to be considered a simple prophylactic 
measure aimed at preventing intentional discrimination,'' and that 
Title VI regulations adopting disparate-impact liability ``do not 
`effectuate' Title VI.'' 90 FR at 57143 (quoting 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1).
    The Department agrees with the Attorney General's reasons,\1\ and 
for its own independent reasons discussed below, revises its own Title 
VI regulations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Executive Order 12250 delegates to the Attorney General 
authority to coordinate and ensure consistent enforcement of Federal 
civil rights laws across agencies administering Federally assisted 
programs. See 45 FR 72995.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

D. Need for Rulemaking

    The Department's regulation at 29 CFR 31.3, titled ``General 
Standards,'' contains several provisions that go beyond the statutory 
text and constitutional requirements by prohibiting facially neutral 
policies that have a disparate impact and in some instances encourage 
or even require unlawful discrimination labeled as ``affirmative 
action.'' Section 31.3(b)(2) is the current regulation's general 
disparate-impact prohibition, which states that ``a recipient . . . may 
not . . . utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the 
effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination because of their 
race, color or national origin . . . .'' 29 CFR 31.3(b)(2).
    Beyond that general prohibition, Sec.  31.3(b)(3) addresses a 
Federal funding recipient's selection of the site or location of 
facilities and includes two references to ``effect'' that extend the 
scope of prohibited conduct to include conduct with an unintentional 
disparate impact. Section 31.3(b)(6) concerns the use of ``affirmative 
action'' and provides that funding recipients may (and sometimes must) 
use race, color, or national origin to overcome unintentional disparate 
``effects.'' But this provision does not expressly specify that the 
funding recipient must narrowly tailor such use nor that this use must 
serve a compelling governmental interest, as is required to satisfy 
strict scrutiny. Section 31.3(c) addresses prohibited discriminatory 
employment practices and extends beyond intentional discrimination to 
prohibiting conduct that ``tends'' to have a discriminatory effect. 
Finally, Sec.  31.3(d) provides illustrative examples with respect to 
the applicable scope of the regulations that refer to program names no 
longer in use. It also muddles the distinction between prohibited 
discrimination in employment practices where a primary objective of the 
Federal financial assistance is to provide employment and those 
practices that ``tend'' to have a discriminatory impact on 
participation in covered programs. In the interest of clarity for the 
regulated community, this rule deletes Sec.  31.3(d) in its entirety.
    There are serious statutory and constitutional concerns with the 
legality of the Department's Title VI disparate-impact regulations. The 
Department also has serious policy concerns with its current disparate-
impact regulations because they create confusion, undermine public 
confidence in the nation's civil rights laws and the rule of law, and 
produce burdensome litigation and compliance costs.
1. Serious Legal Concerns
    There are serious statutory concerns as to whether Title VI 
authorizes the disparate-impact provisions of the current regulations. 
As the Supreme Court has made clear, Title VI prohibits ``only 
intentional discrimination'' and ``permits'' facially neutral policies 
that result in disparate outcomes when there is no discriminatory 
intent. Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 280, 286 n.6. That is the ``single, best 
meaning'' of Title VI. Loper Bright, 603 U.S. at 400. Sandoval calls 
into serious doubt the legality of the Department's ``disparate-impact 
regulations.'' Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 281-82, 284-85 (noting that DOJ's 
regulations were in ``considerable tension'' with the Supreme Court's 
Title VI precedents). Although Sandoval resolved only the question of 
private enforceability, subsequent cases such as Loper Bright have made 
clear that the Department cannot extend Title VI beyond its original 
public meaning. See 603 U.S. at 412-13 (holding that ``courts must . . 
. ensur[e] that [an] agency acts within'' its statutory authority). And 
even in the absence of Supreme Court precedent, the Department would 
have concluded that the best reading of Title VI is that it prohibits 
only intentional discrimination.
    Title VI authorizes agencies to promulgate regulations ``to 
effectuate'' the statute's prohibition of intentional discrimination. 
42 U.S.C. 2000d-1. The current regulations' extension of prohibited 
conduct to include conduct with an unintentional disparate impact 
reaches a vastly broader scope than the statute itself. This scope is 
too broad to be considered a simple prophylactic measure aimed at 
preventing intentional discrimination. See Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 286 
n.6 (``[Title VI] permits the very behavior that the regulations 
forbid.''). Thus, the disparate-impact regulations do not 
``effectuate'' Title VI. 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1.
    There are also serious concerns about whether the Department's 
Title VI regulations pass constitutional muster under the Equal 
Protection Clause. As the Supreme Court recently held in

[[Page 40375]]

Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President & Fellows of Harvard 
Coll., 600 U.S. 181 (2023) (SFFA), ``the Equal Protection Clause . . . 
applies without regard to any differences of race, of color, or of 
nationality--it is universal in its application'' and the ``guarantee 
of equal protection cannot mean one thing when applied to one 
individual and something else when applied to a person of another 
color.'' Id. at 206 (internal quotation marks omitted) (first quoting 
Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 369 (1886); and then quoting Bakke, 
438 U.S. at 289-90 (Powell, J.)). Despite the promises of the Equal 
Protection Clause, a funding recipient's risk of disparate-impact 
liability under the Department's regulations is triggered by 
unintentional disparate outcomes, which the recipient may not even know 
about without investigation. To evaluate and avoid this risk, the 
funding recipient must incur investigatory costs, such as conducting an 
impact analysis, and is coerced to proactively consider race, color, 
and national origin, and potentially use it to change the unintended 
disparate outcomes.
    In short, disparate-impact liability encourages and, in some cases, 
requires covered entities to engage in the intentional use of race and 
racial balancing to eliminate those disparate outcomes by treating 
certain racial groups differently from others--the exact conduct the 
Equal Protection Clause forbids. See id. The serious constitutional 
concerns raised by these perverse incentives further confirm that the 
best reading of Title VI is that it prohibits only intentional 
discrimination and does not authorize the Department to impose 
disparate-impact liability. See Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Fla. Gulf 
Coast Bldg. & Constr. Trades Council, 485 U.S. 568, 575 (1988) 
(``[W]here an otherwise acceptable construction of a statute would 
raise serious constitutional problems, the Court will construe the 
statute to avoid such problems unless such construction is plainly 
contrary to the intent of Congress.'' (citing NLRB v. Catholic Bishop 
of Chi., 440 U.S. 490, 499-501, 504 (1979))).
    Further, Federal programs that are found to create racial or ethnic 
classifications are subject to the most searching review. In Adarand 
Constructors, Inc. v. Pe[ntilde]a, for instance, the Supreme Court held 
that Federal affirmative action programs that use racial and ethnic 
criteria as a basis for decision-making are subject to strict scrutiny. 
515 U.S. 200, 220 (1995). Such programs satisfy strict scrutiny only if 
they serve a ``compelling interest'' and are ``narrowly tailored'' to 
the achievement of that interest--a ``daunting'' standard to achieve. 
Id. at 235-37; SFFA, 600 U.S. at 206; see also Free Speech Coal., Inc. 
v. Paxton, 606 U.S. 461, 484 (2025) (``Strict scrutiny--which requires 
a restriction to be the least restrictive means of achieving a 
compelling governmental interest--is `the most demanding test known to 
constitutional law.''' (quoting City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507, 
534 (1997))). The use of race, color, or national origin necessitated 
by the disparate-impact provisions runs into serious issues with the 
requirement of narrow tailoring to achieve a compelling interest. SFFA, 
600 U.S. at 206-07.
    Similarly, the ``affirmative action'' provision authorizes and 
sometimes requires the intentional use of race without requiring that 
this intentional use be narrowly tailored to serve a recognized 
compelling interest. Instead, it encourages intentional racial 
balancing ``to overcome the effects of'' unintended racial disparities. 
29 CFR 31.3(b)(6). Thus, for substantially the same reasons as above, 
the ``affirmative action'' provision raises serious constitutional 
concerns.
    As summarized above, there are serious statutory and constitutional 
concerns with the Department's disparate-impact regulations. But even 
if the regulations were consistent with the statute, the Department 
finds that eliminating the potential constitutional concerns addressed 
above would independently justify the amendment of the regulations. Cf. 
U.S. Tel. Ass'n v. FCC, 188 F.3d 521, 528 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (concluding 
it was not ``arbitrary and capricious'' to adopt a certain policy in 
order to ``avoid[ ] raising a non-trivial constitutional question''). 
And even if the regulations did not raise serious constitutional 
concerns, the Department finds that eliminating the costs and confusion 
caused by the mismatch between the statute and the disparate-impact 
regulations would independently justify the amendment of the 
regulations.
2. Serious Policy Concerns
    The Department also has serious policy concerns with the imposition 
of disparate-impact liability. While the Department expresses its 
policy concerns with disparate-impact liability independent of 
Executive Order 14281, that Order sets forth many valid policy concerns 
with disparate-impact liability. Moreover, the legal concerns 
identified above have caused uncertainty and confusion for Federal 
funding recipients as to whether and when they need to comply with the 
disparate-impact regulations and when they can or must consider race, 
color, and national origin. As explained above, Sandoval casts 
substantial doubt on the validity of the disparate-impact regulations 
that many Federal departments and agencies have promulgated pursuant to 
Title VI. 532 U.S. at 280-82.
    Additionally in practice, and as explained above, disparate-impact 
liability leads covered entities to engage in racial balancing even as 
Title VI forbids intentional racial discrimination. This tension tends 
to create confusion and undermine public confidence in the nation's 
civil rights laws and in the rule of law itself, as the law seems to 
both forbid and require the same conduct.
    These problems are amplified by the arbitrary nature of the racial 
and ethnic categories typically used to measure disparate effects, 
which, by virtue of their arbitrariness, typically lack a meaningful 
connection to a compelling interest. See, e.g., SFFA, 600 U.S. at 216-
17 (explaining that the ``[racial] categories'' utilized by Harvard and 
University of North Carolina were ``themselves imprecise in many ways'' 
and ``the use of these opaque racial categories undermine[d], instead 
of promote[d], [their] goals''). This confusion undermines the law's 
ability to teach principles of nondiscrimination. The Department 
believes that these policy concerns independently justify repealing 
certain parts of its regulation to cure this confusion, remove the 
incentive for covered entities to engage in racial balancing, and 
maintain clarity and public confidence in the nation's civil rights 
laws.
    The Department has considered the view that looking at disparate 
effects can sometimes be useful in uncovering or deterring subtle 
intentional discrimination or intentional indifference to unnecessary 
and arbitrary barriers. But that view's alleged benefits are outweighed 
by the other issues and factors the Department has considered. And in 
any event, the concern is mitigated by the fact that eliminating 
disparate-impact liability does not preclude the use of data on 
disparate outcomes to help prove intentional discrimination. Indeed, 
under the Department's Title VI regulations, which the current changes 
do not alter, ``recipients should have available for the department 
racial and ethnic data showing the extent to which members of minority 
groups are beneficiaries of federally assisted programs.'' 29 CFR 
31.5(b). Both the Department and private litigants rely on such data as 
a potential indicator of intentional discrimination. This use of

[[Page 40376]]

statistical disparity to help establish, as an evidentiary matter, 
liability for intentional discrimination materially differs from using 
it to impose liability for an unintentional disparate impact.
    The Department also considered alternatives to eliminating the 
affected provisions altogether. For instance, as an alternative to 
deleting the text of 29 CFR 31.3(b)(6)(i), the Department considered 
incorporating the constitutional requirements discussed above directly 
into this provision. More specifically, the Department considered 
specifying that any affirmative action taken to overcome the effects of 
prior identified discrimination by the Federal government on the ground 
of race, color, or national origin be narrowly tailored to the 
achievement of that interest. See Adarand Constructors, 515 U.S. 200. 
But even if that alleviated the Department's constitutional concerns 
with the affirmative-action requirement, any version of imposing 
liability for failing to take action to remedy the effects of past 
discrimination is inconsistent with Title VI's original public meaning. 
The Department determines that any benefits from requiring affirmative 
action are outweighed by the Department's legal and policy concerns. 
And even if possible, developing such a rule would not solve the 
confusion or rule-of-law concerns expressed above, nor reduce the 
compliance and litigation costs that covered entities face. The 
Department believes that the better course is to avoid the 
complexities, costs, and litigation associated with this alternative, 
even if eliminating disparate-impact liability would ultimately leave 
some problems unaddressed and others inadequately addressed.
    Overall, after considering the relevant issues and factors and 
weighing the relevant considerations, the Department finds that, 
regardless of the legality of the Department's disparate-impact 
regulations, the above summarized policy concerns, when viewed 
separately or cumulatively, independently justify the repeal of its 
disparate-impact regulations.

E. Executive Order 14173

    On January 21, 2025, the President issued Executive Order 14173. 
Among other things, the Executive Order revoked Executive Order 11246 
of September 24, 1965 (Equal Employment Opportunity).
    The Department's Title VI regulations currently include two 
references to Executive Order 11246. See 29 CFR 31.12(a)(1); 29 CFR 
31.3(c)(3). Because these references were rendered obsolete by the 
revocation of Executive Order 11246, the Department now makes technical 
edits to delete them.

F. Regulatory Modification

    The Department's current regulations expand the scope of prohibited 
conduct beyond what Title VI itself prohibits--namely, intentional 
discrimination. This rule's regulatory changes address concerns 
regarding the statutory authority supporting the scope of these 
regulations that the Supreme Court questioned in Sandoval, harmonize 
the implementing regulations with Title VI, implement changes directed 
by Executive Order 14281, promote consistent enforcement among private 
plaintiffs and Federal departments and agencies, and provide much 
needed clarity to the courts and Federal funding recipients and 
beneficiaries. For the reasons summarized above, the Department amends 
the following provisions in its Title VI implementing regulation that 
explain the particular types of discrimination prohibited. These 
provisions are located at 29 CFR 31.3. Additionally, as described 
above, the Department amends 29 CFR 31.12(a)(1) and deletes 29 CFR 
31.3(c)(3) to remove now-outdated references to Executive Order 11246.

III. Changes

A. Table Summarizing Amendments

    The table below indicates the exact wording changes. For each 
section indicated in the left column, the text shown in the middle 
column is removed and the text shown in the right column is added:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Section                     Remove                 Add
------------------------------------------------------------------------
31.12(a)(1)...................  ``10925, 11114 and      ``10925 and
                                 11246''.                11114''.
31.3(b)(2)....................  Full text of            ``[Removed]''.
                                 paragraph: ``(2) A
                                 recipient . . . or
                                 national origin.''.
31.3(b)(3)....................  ``or effect'' from      ................
                                 both places.
31.3(b)(6)....................  Full text of paragraph  ................
                                 (6), subparts (i) and
                                 (ii)
31.3(c)(1)....................  ``(1)'' from ``(c)      ................
                                 Employment practices.
                                 (1) Where a primary
                                 objective of the . .
                                 . .''.
31.3(c)(2)....................  Full text of            ................
                                 paragraph: ``(2)
                                 Where a primary
                                 objective of the . .
                                 . .''.
31.3(c)(3)....................  Full text of            ................
                                 paragraph: ``(3) The
                                 requirements
                                 applicable to
                                 construction
                                 employment . . .
                                 which supersedes
                                 it.''.
31.3(d).......................  Full text of            ................
                                 paragraph: ``(d) In
                                 order that all
                                 parties . . .''
------------------------------------------------------------------------

B. Section-by-Section Analysis

1. Section 31.3(b)(2)
    Section 31.3(b)(2) is the general prohibition of unintentional 
disparate impact. This paragraph expands prohibited conduct from 
purposeful discrimination to Federal funding recipients ``utiliz[ing] 
criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of 
subjecting individuals to discrimination.'' Because this paragraph's 
only purpose is to prohibit conduct having an unintentional disparate 
impact, this rule deletes this paragraph and thus amends the 
regulations to conform more closely to Title VI. The rule replaces 
paragraph (b)(2) with a placeholder to maintain the numbering accuracy 
of previous citations and other references to other parts of this 
section.
2. Section 31.3(b)(3)
    Section 31.3(b)(3) deals with a Federal funding recipient's or 
applicant's selection of sites or locations of facilities. The 
paragraph provides that a funding recipient may not make selections 
with the ``purpose or effect'' of discriminating, or ``with the purpose 
or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of 
the objectives of'' Title VI or the Department's implementing 
regulations. The paragraph's two ``or effect'' references extend its 
scope to conduct having an unintentional disparate impact, and this 
rule deletes both ``or effect'' references to conform paragraph (b)(3) 
more closely to Title VI.
3. Section 31.3(b)(6)
    Section 31.3(b)(6) deals with ``affirmative action.'' Paragraph 
(b)(6)(i) requires that a recipient ``must take affirmative action to 
overcome the effects of prior discrimination'' if, in

[[Page 40377]]

``administering a program,'' the funding ``recipient has previously 
discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, or national 
origin.'' This provision goes beyond the Equal Protection Clause, which 
in limited circumstances permits, but does not mandate, the government 
to take narrowly tailored action to remedy the effects of its 
identified past discrimination. See, e.g., Bakke, 438 U.S. at 307 
(Powell, J.). This provision also does not expressly require narrow 
tailoring to counter particular past discrimination.
    Paragraph (b)(6)(ii) similarly requires affirmative action in 
programs even in the absence of prior discrimination and consequently 
could encourage intentional racial classifications, racial preferences, 
and other race-based actions without the supporting compelling interest 
and narrow tailoring that the Equal Protection Clause requires. As 
explained above, Congress intended Title VI to mirror the Equal 
Protection Clause.
    The rule deletes paragraphs (b)(6)(i) and (b)(6)(ii) to remove 
their authorization of conduct not permitted by the Equal Protection 
Clause.
4. Section 31.3(c)
    Section 31.3(c) addresses prohibited discriminatory employment 
practices. Paragraph (c)(1) prohibits intentionally discriminatory 
employment practices when a primary objective of the Federal financial 
assistance is to provide employment. Paragraph (c)(2) extends the 
prohibition to employment practices of the recipient even where ``a 
primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is not to provide 
employment'' if discrimination in the non-funded ``employment practices 
of the recipient or other persons subject to the regulation tends, on 
the ground of race, color or national origin, to exclude individuals 
from participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them 
to discrimination under any program to which this regulation applies . 
. . .'' This paragraph's prohibition is not limited to intentional 
discrimination, but rather extends to prohibiting conduct that 
``tends'' to have a discriminatory effect on a program without the 
primary objective of providing employment.
    Moreover, paragraph (c)(2)'s extension to employment practices 
where the Federal funding's primary objective is not to provide 
employment conflicts with the statutory limitation found in 42 U.S.C. 
2000d-3. That section states that ``[n]othing contained in [Title VI] 
shall be construed to authorize action under [Title VI] by any 
department or agency with respect to any employment practice of any 
employer, employment agency, or labor organization except where a 
primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is to provide 
employment.'' 42 U.S.C. 2000d-3; see also Johnson v. Transp. Agency, 
Santa Clara Cnty., 480 U.S. 616, 627-28 n.6 (1987) (citing the 
statutory limitation and noting Congress's intent that Title VI not 
``impinge'' on Title VII, which prohibits discriminatory employment 
practices). The rule deletes paragraph (c)(2) to amend the regulation 
so that it more closely adheres to the scope of conduct Congress 
intended Title VI to prohibit.
    Finally, paragraph (c)(3) relates exclusively to Executive Order 
11246 and any Executive Order superseding it. Executive Order 11246 was 
revoked by Executive Order 14173 on January 21, 2025, 90 FR 8633, and 
no Executive Order was issued to supersede it. The rule deletes 
paragraph (c)(3) to eliminate the outdated reference to Executive Order 
11246. This rule makes no change to the current text of paragraphs 
(c)(1) except for a technical edit to reflect the removal of paragraphs 
(c)(2) and (c)(3).
5. Section 31.3(d)
    Section 31.3(d) provides illustrative examples of the scope of the 
Department's Title VI regulations but does not itself confer any legal 
rights or obligations on recipients of Federal financial assistance. 
Several of the program names referenced in Sec.  31.3(d) are no longer 
in use, either because those programs have been partially or totally 
subsumed by other statutes or because they have been eliminated 
altogether. For instance, the Manpower Development and Training Act was 
superseded by the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) in 
1973, and Federal workforce training is currently governed by the 
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) of 2014. Similarly, the 
Area Redevelopment Act does not exist in its original form and was 
terminated as of August 31, 1965. Though certain programs referenced in 
Sec.  31.3(d) are currently in effect, the Department has concluded 
that including only some illustrative examples and not others could 
cause confusion among recipients of Federal financial assistance with 
respect to the scope of their obligations under the regulations.
    Furthermore, as noted above, the Department amends Sec.  
31.3(c)(2)'s extension to employment practices where the Federal 
funding's primary objective is not to provide employment because it 
conflicts with the statutory limitation found in 42 U.S.C. 2000d-3. The 
examples in Sec.  31.3(d)(2) and (d)(3) could implicate practices only 
covered under Sec.  31.3(c)(2) and thus undermine the Department's 
conclusion that the scope of these regulations no longer applies to 
employment practices where the Federal financial assistance does not 
have employment as its primary purpose.
    Because the original purpose of Sec.  31.3(d) was to ensure that 
``all parties . . . have a clear understanding of the applicability of 
the regulations,'' and retaining only some of its text could have the 
opposite effect, this rule deletes Sec.  31.3(d) in its entirety.
6. Section 31.12(a)(1)
    Section 31.12(a) explains that nothing in the Part 31 regulations 
``shall be deemed to supersede any of the following,'' and paragraph 
(a)(1) lists ``Executive Orders 10925, 11114 and 11246 and regulations 
issued thereunder.'' Executive Order 11246 was revoked by Executive 
Order 14173 on January 21, 2025, 90 FR 8633. This rule deletes the 
outdated reference to Executive Order 11246.

C. Consideration of Reliance Interests

    The Department has also considered potential legitimate reliance 
interests on the disparate-impact regulations. For instance, recipients 
may have invested in training and other measures to comply with the 
Department's prohibition on disparate-impact discrimination--including 
in connection with impact analyses, employee skill-building and 
education, and know-your-rights materials distributed to 
beneficiaries--on the expectation that this regulatory regime would 
remain intact. However, any such interests are minimal. Sandoval cast 
serious doubt on the regulations' viability more than two decades ago. 
Furthermore, Executive Order 14281 directed all agencies to 
``deprioritize enforcement of all statutes and regulations to the 
extent they include disparate-impact liability,'' including the 
Department's Title VI regulations. 90 FR 17538. Finally, disparate-
impact regulations are not authorized by the best reading of Title VI, 
as the Supreme Court has affirmed that Title VI prohibits only 
intentional discrimination. No reliance interest can justify the 
maintenance of unauthorized regulations. With respect to the technical 
amendments deleting references to Executive Order 11246, there can be 
no legitimate reliance on authorities that are no longer in force. 
Accordingly, the Department's legal and policy concerns--whether 
considered

[[Page 40378]]

separately or cumulatively--outweigh any minimal reliance interests.

IV. Severability

    The Department's position is that each of the amendments serves a 
vital, related, but distinct purpose. The Department also confirms that 
each of the amendments is intended to operate independently of each 
other and that the potential invalidity of one amendment should not 
affect the other amendments. The Department would adopt any of the 
amendments independently of the invalidity of a separate amendment.

V. Regulatory Certifications

A. Administrative Procedure Act

    The Department issues this final rule without prior public notice 
and comment or a delayed effective date pursuant to the Administrative 
Procedure Act's exception for rules ``relating to agency management or 
personnel or to public property, loans, grants, benefits, or 
contracts.'' 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(2).
    Title VI concerns non-discrimination conditions on the receipt of 
Federal financial assistance, and more particularly to the receipt of 
Federal ``[g]rants and loans,'' ``property,'' ``personnel'' and ``[a]ny 
Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of 
its purposes the provision of assistance.'' 29 CFR 31.2(e); see also 29 
CFR 31.6 (requiring funding recipient sign contractual assurance of 
compliance with Title VI); Cummings v. Premier Rehab Keller, P.L.L.C., 
596 U.S. 212, 217-18 (2022) (observing that Congress enacted Title VI 
``[p]ursuant to its authority to `fix the terms on which it shall 
disburse federal money' '' (internal citation omitted)). Cf. Education 
Programs or Activities Receiving or Benefitting from Federal Financial 
Assistance, 82 FR 46655, 46655 (Oct. 6, 2017) (invoking the section 
553(a)(2) exception to amend Title IX regulations to ``promote 
consistency in the enforcement of Title IX for [the Department of 
Agriculture] financial assistance recipients''); Preserving Community 
and Neighborhood Choice, 85 FR 47899 (Aug. 7, 2020) (invoking the 
exception to repeal Housing and Urban Development rule regarding 
Federal grantees); Participation by Minority Business Enterprise in 
Department of Transportation Programs, 53 FR 18285 (May 23, 1988) 
(invoking the exception to expand coverage of Department of 
Transportation regulation regarding Federal Aviation Administration's 
airport financial assistance program); Nondiscrimination on the Basis 
of Handicap in Federally Assisted Programs--Suspension of Guidelines 
with Respect to Mass Transportation, 46 FR 40687 (Aug. 11, 1981) 
(invoking the exception to suspend Department of Justice guidelines 
regarding prohibiting disability discrimination in transportation 
programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance).
    Indeed, invoking 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(2) is consistent with the Office 
for Management and Budget's (OMB) definition for ``Federal financial 
assistance'' under 2 CFR 200.1, which defines ``Federal financial 
assistance'' according to the same categories as the Administrative 
Procedure Act's exception for rules ``relating to agency management or 
personnel or to public property, loans, grants, benefits, or 
contracts,'' 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(2). All the forms of Federal financial 
assistance set forth under 2 CFR 200.1 that are subject to this 
regulation [29 CFR part 31] would fall under the ``public property, 
loans, grants, benefits, or contracts'' exception. Thus, the Department 
issues this final rule without prior public notice and comment or a 
delayed effective date under 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(2).

B. Executive Orders 12866 and 13563 (Regulatory Review)

    Among other requirements, Executive Order 12866 requires agencies 
to submit ``significant regulatory actions'' to the Office of 
Management and Budget's (``OMB'') Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (``OIRA'') for review. See 58 FR 51735 (Oct. 4, 1993). Section 
3(f) of E.O. 12866 defines a ``significant regulatory action'' as a 
regulatory action that is likely to result in a rule that may: (1) have 
an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more, or adversely 
affect in a material way a sector of the economy, productivity, 
competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or state, 
local, or tribal governments or communities; (2) create serious 
inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by 
another agency; (3) materially alter the budgetary impact of 
entitlements, grants, user fees or loan programs or the rights and 
obligations of recipients thereof; or (4) raise novel legal or policy 
issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or 
the principles set forth in the Executive Order. OIRA has determined 
that this rule is a ``significant regulatory action'' under section 
3(f) of E.O. 12866. Accordingly, this rule was submitted to OIRA for 
review.
    Executive Order 13563 directs agencies to, among other things, 
propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that 
its benefits justify its costs; the regulation is tailored to impose 
the least burden on society, consistent with achieving the regulatory 
objectives; and in choosing among alternative regulatory approaches, 
the agency has selected those approaches that maximize net benefits. 
See 76 FR 3821 (Jan. 21, 2011). E.O. 13563 recognizes that some costs 
and benefits are difficult to quantify and provides that, where 
appropriate and permitted by law, agencies may consider and discuss 
qualitative values that are difficult or impossible to quantify, 
including equity, human dignity, fairness, and distributive impacts. 
Id.
    As explained in the preamble, the regulatory modifications this 
rule makes are necessary to address concerns regarding the authority 
supporting the scope of the Department's Title VI regulation that the 
Supreme Court raised in Sandoval, harmonize the implementing regulation 
with Title VI, promote consistency in enforcement among private 
plaintiffs and Federal departments and agencies, as well as provide 
much needed clarity to the courts and Federal funding recipients and 
beneficiaries. In essence, this rule conforms the Department's 
regulation to existing statutory law, as interpreted by the Supreme 
Court. It also deletes certain outdated references to program names no 
longer in use and to now-revoked Executive Order 11246.
    Data limitations make the costs and benefits of the rule difficult 
to quantify. Although it does not represent the monetary impact of the 
rule, the Department of Labor issued approximately 11,193 separate 
awards totaling approximately $65.9 billion from FY 2020-FY 2024.\2\ In 
FY 2025 alone, the Department issued approximately 6,033 separate 
awards totaling $11.5 billion. The Department conducted approximately 
212 Title VI-related investigations and compliance reviews regarding 
these funds and their recipients from FY 2020 through FY 2024.\3\ This 
rule will allow the Department to direct its resources towards 
addressing allegations of intentional discrimination and managing 
investigations and resolutions efficiently.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ U.S. Department of the Treasury. `` USASpending.gov .'' 
 USASpending.gov ,  www.usaspending.gov . Accessed May 29, 2026.
    \3\ U.S. Dep't of Labor, Civil Rights Center, Complaints 
Tracking and Reporting System FY 2020-2024 Report (generated January 
2026).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department estimated that the number of affected entities 
(i.e., the recipients of Federal financial assistance under Title VI of 
the Civil Rights Act of

[[Page 40379]]

1964) that are expected to be impacted by this rule is potentially up 
to 15,000 based on data showing that the Department issued 
approximately 11,193 separate awards over the five-year period from 
FY2020 through FY2024. Some entities have received multiple disparate 
awards, and new entities are expected to receive disparate awards in 
the future as well. As such, the Department conservatively assumes that 
the number of affected entities could be as high as 15,000 for the 
purpose of estimating rule familiarization costs.
    The Department anticipates that the bulk of the workload under this 
final rule will be performed by employees in occupations similar to the 
one associated with the following Standard Occupational Classification 
(SOC) code: SOC 11-3121 (Human Resources Managers). The Department used 
the wage rate of Human Resources Managers as a proxy for the wage rate 
of Equal Opportunity Officers. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (``BLS''), the mean hourly wage rate for Human Resources 
Managers in May 2024 was $77.15.\4\ For this analysis, the Department 
used a fringe benefits rate of 46 percent and an overhead rate of 17 
percent, resulting in a fully loaded hourly compensation rate for Human 
Resources Managers of $125.75 [= $77.15 + ($77.15 x 0.46) + ($77.15 x 
0.17)].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Employment and Wage 
Statistics program, ``Occupational Employment and Wages--May 2024,'' 
 https://www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/ocwage_04022025.htm .
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Rule familiarization costs represent direct costs to the recipients 
of Federal financial assistance under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964 to read and familiarize themselves with the provisions of this 
final rule. The Department calculated this cost by multiplying the 
number of recipients of financial assistance by the estimated time to 
review the rule and by the hourly compensation of a Human Resources 
Manager. The Department estimates that rule familiarization will take 
an average of 1 hour by a Human Resources Manager who is paid a fully 
loaded wage of $125.75. Therefore, the one-time rule familiarization 
cost for the recipients of financial assistance under Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 is estimated to be $1,886,250 (= 15,000 
recipients x 1 hour x $125.75 per hour).
    The Department is unable to quantify how funding recipients will 
respond to the regulatory changes. We anticipate this action will 
result in greater flexibility and lower compliance costs for 
recipients.
    This final rule to eliminate disparate-impact liability under the 
Department's Title VI regulations is expected to generate cost savings 
and operational efficiencies for Federal funding recipients primarily 
by narrowing the scope of prohibited conduct to intentional 
discrimination. By rescinding provisions that previously prohibited 
practices with an unintentional disparate impact, the rule reduces 
legal ambiguity and the need for extensive preventative compliance 
efforts. Disparate-impact guidelines promulgated in the Title VII 
context illustrate the kinds of steps recipients might take to avoid 
disparate-impact liability, including ongoing recordkeeping, adverse-
impact monitoring, validation studies, and review of alternatives, 
frequently involving legal consultation and statistical analysis to 
ensure that facially neutral policies would not inadvertently trigger 
liability.\5\ Removing the relevant provisions will allow organizations 
to focus their compliance resources on preventing intentional 
discrimination, which is more clearly defined and easier to avoid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \5\ See, e.g., 29 CFR 1607.4 (guidelines requiring collection 
and maintenance of impact data); id. 1607.5 (validity studies); id. 
1607.3(B) (consideration of alternatives with less adverse impact).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Relatedly, this final rule also meaningfully decreases 
investigation-related costs. Again, as other disparate-impact 
regulations illustrate, avoiding disparate-impact liability can be a 
complex and costly affair, potentially involving, among other things, 
internal disparate-impact analyses to assess whether policies such as 
hiring criteria, program-eligibility rules, or resource-allocation 
decisions might yield statistically uneven outcomes across protected 
groups.\6\ Because disparate-impact liability could arise even in the 
absence of complaints, organizations were incentivized to proactively 
audit their operations, sometimes repeatedly, to mitigate risk. 
Eliminating this requirement reduces the need for such ongoing internal 
investigations and the infrastructure that supports them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \6\ See 29 CFR 1607.4(D).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Compliance costs are likewise expected to decline. These compliance 
costs could include, e.g., developing and detailing compliance programs 
specifically aimed at avoiding disparate impacts, including revising 
standard operating procedures, and modifying selection criteria or 
program rules to achieve more balanced outcomes.\7\ In some cases, 
entities may have felt compelled to adopt race-conscious measures or 
engage in racial balancing to avoid enforcement actions even though 
doing so was legally prohibited. This introduced additional legal 
complexity and operational challenges. The final rule removes the 
regulatory pressure to engage in these practices, allowing 
organizations to streamline compliance programs and reduce expenditures 
on training, policy redesign, and external advisory services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \7\ See 29 CFR 1607.3(B).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Another benefit is increased regulatory clarity and predictability. 
Disparate-impact standards often lack clear thresholds, making it 
difficult for recipients to determine in advance whether a given policy 
is compliant. This uncertainty can lead to overcompliance--where 
organizations expend resources to mitigate hypothetical risks--or 
undercompliance due to a misunderstanding of obligations. By focusing 
solely on intentional discrimination, the rule provides a clearer, more 
objective standard, enabling recipients to allocate resources more 
efficiently and make decisions with greater confidence. This clarity 
can also improve program delivery by reducing delays associated with 
legal review and compliance checks.
    Finally, the regulatory changes are expected to yield broader 
institutional benefits, including improved allocation of public and 
private resources. Funds that would have been spent on compliance 
infrastructure or statistical monitoring can instead be redirected 
toward core programmatic activities, such as workforce development, 
training services, or community outreach. For smaller recipients, 
particularly those that may lack in-house legal or compliance 
departments, the reduction in regulatory burden can be especially 
significant. These changes are expected to lower barriers to 
participation in Federally funded programs and enhance overall program 
accessibility and effectiveness.
    In sum, by eliminating disparate-impact liability, the final rule 
reduces the need for extensive internal investigations and complex 
compliance systems. It advances a more straightforward standard 
centered on intentional discrimination, thereby generating tangible 
cost savings and operational efficiencies for recipients of Federal 
funding.
    The Department recognizes that a funding recipient may receive 
Federal funds from sources other than the Department. Because of E.O. 
14281 and DOJ's recent amendments to its own Title VI regulations, 
however, the Department expects that other Federal departments and 
agencies will similarly

[[Page 40380]]

revise their Title VI regulations. Importantly, pursuant to Executive 
Order 12250, ``[t]he Attorney General shall coordinate the 
implementation and enforcement by Executive agencies of . . . Title VI 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.).'' 45 FR 
72995, 72995 (Nov. 2, 1980). Accordingly, DOJ acts as the lead Federal 
agency responsible for defining the nature and scope of Title VI's 
prohibition of discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national 
origin in programs or activities receiving Federal financial 
assistance.
    Regardless, the Department does not envision that this rule will 
appreciably increase administrative or compliance costs for funding 
recipients who must also adhere to the regulations of another 
department or agency. This deregulatory action does not create any new 
obligations for funding recipients. On the contrary, by eliminating 
disparate-impact liability from the regulation, it eliminates a source 
of regulatory confusion, narrows the conduct prohibited, and thus 
lessens the costs of compliance and potential liability. Moreover, 
recipients who receive funds for the same program or activity from more 
than one Federal entity already enter into separate contractual 
assurances with each funding entity, see, e.g., 29 CFR 31.6. These 
contractual assurances already impose varying requirements that each 
Federal funding source deems necessary. Funding recipients will 
continue to be held to the most stringent contractual assurance and 
regulation.
    Based on the analysis of the practical qualitative costs and 
benefits noted above, the Department believes that this rule is 
consistent with the principles of Executive Orders 12866 and 13563, 
including the requirements that, to the extent permitted by law, the 
Department adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that 
its benefits justify its costs and choose a regulatory approach that 
maximizes net benefits. See 58 FR at 51735; 76 FR at 3821.

C. Executive Order 14192 (Unleashing Prosperity Through Deregulation)

    Executive Order 14192 requires an agency, unless prohibited by law, 
to identify at least 10 existing regulations to be repealed when the 
agency publicly proposes for notice and comment or otherwise 
promulgates a new regulation. 90 FR 9065, 9065 (Jan. 31, 2025). In 
furtherance of this requirement, section 3(c) of the Order requires 
that ``any new incremental costs associated with new regulations shall, 
to the extent permitted by law, be offset by the elimination of 
existing costs associated with at least 10 prior regulations.'' Id. 
This rule eliminates unnecessary regulation by revising the 
Department's current Title VI regulations, which extend prohibited 
conduct to include conduct having an unintentional disparate impact and 
thus expand the scope of those regulations to a broader range of 
conduct than the statute prohibits. Accordingly, the Department expects 
this rule to be a deregulatory action under Executive Order 14192.

D. Executive Order 14294 (Fighting Overcriminalization in Federal 
Regulations)

    Executive Order 14294 requires agencies promulgating regulations 
with criminal regulatory offenses potentially subject to criminal 
enforcement to ``explicitly describe the conduct subject to criminal 
enforcement, the authorizing statutes, and the mens rea standard 
applicable to'' each element of those offenses. 90 FR 20363, 20363 (May 
9, 2025). This rule does not impose a criminal regulatory penalty and 
is thus exempt from Executive Order 14294 requirements.

E. Executive Order 13132 (Federalism)

    This rule will not have a substantial, direct effect on the 
relationship between the national government and the states, on 
distribution of power and responsibilities among various levels of 
government, or on states' policymaking discretion. States that choose 
to receive Federal financial assistance from the Department do so 
voluntarily and agree to comply with relevant statutory requirements as 
a condition of receiving such funding. This rule does not subject 
states or any other funding recipients or beneficiaries to new 
obligations. This rule amends and clarifies existing regulations that 
are required by statute. Therefore, in accordance with section 6 of 
Executive Order 13132, 64 FR 43255, 43257-58 (Aug. 4, 1999), the 
Department has determined that these amendments do not have sufficient 
federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism 
summary impact statement.

F. Executive Order 12988 (Civil Justice Reform)

    This rule meets the applicable standards set forth in sections 3(a) 
and (b)(2) of Executive Order 12988 to specify provisions in clear 
language. See 61 FR 4729, 4731-32 (Feb. 5, 1996). Pursuant to section 
3(b)(1)(I) of the Executive Order, id. at 4731, nothing in this 
proposed or any previous rule (or in any administrative policy, 
directive, ruling, notice, guideline, guidance, or writing) directly 
relating to the Program that is the subject of this proposed rule is 
intended to create any legal or procedural rights enforceable against 
the United States.

G. Executive Order 12250

    Pursuant to section 1-202 of Executive Order 12250, DOJ has the 
responsibility to ``review . . . proposed rules . . . of the Executive 
agencies'' implementing nondiscrimination statutes such as Title VI in 
order to identify those which are inadequate, unclear or unnecessarily 
inconsistent.'' Additionally, section 1-101 of Executive Order 12250 
delegated the President's responsibility to approve Title VI 
regulations to the Attorney General. See 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1. DOJ has 
reviewed and approved this rule.

H. Regulatory Flexibility Act

    The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (RFA), 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., 
as amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 
1996, Public Law 104-121 (March 29, 1996), requires Federal agencies 
engaged in rulemaking to consider the impact of their rules on small 
entities, consider alternatives to minimize that impact, and solicit 
public comment on their analyses. The RFA requires the assessment of 
the impact of a regulation on a wide range of small entities, including 
small businesses, not-for profit organizations, and small governmental 
jurisdictions. Agencies must perform a review to determine whether a 
proposed or final rule would have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities. 5 U.S.C. 603. This rule does not 
require a regulatory flexibility analysis under the RFA because, for 
the reasons described above, no notice of proposed rulemaking is 
required under 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(2). See Or. Trollers Ass'n v. Gutierrez, 
452 F.3d 1104, 1123-24 (9th Cir. 2006) (noting that the RFA does not 
apply when an agency validly invokes an exception to the public comment 
requirements of 5 U.S.C. 553). Further, the Department, in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 605(b), has reviewed these regulations and certifies that 
the rule's changes will not have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities, in large part because these 
regulatory changes do not impose any new substantive obligations on 
Federal funding recipients. The rule amends and clarifies existing 
regulations that are required by Title VI. The rule merely harmonizes 
the scope of the regulations to conform with the scope of Title VI, 
which does not prohibit conduct having an unintentional disparate 
impact. All

[[Page 40381]]

Federal funding recipients have been bound by the existing standards 
that will remain in place after this rule since their initial 
promulgation.

I. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995

    The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (``UMRA'') requires that 
agencies assess anticipated costs and benefits before issuing any rule 
that would impose spending costs on State, local, or tribal governments 
in the aggregate, or on the private sector, in any 1 year of $100 
million in 1995 dollars, updated annually for inflation. That threshold 
is currently approximately $206 million. This rulemaking will not 
result in the expenditure by State, local, or tribal governments, in 
the aggregate, or by the private sector, in excess of the threshold. 
The UMRA also, however, excludes from its coverage any proposed or 
final Federal regulation that ``establishes or enforces any statutory 
rights that prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, 
religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap, or disability.'' 2 
U.S.C. 1503(2). Accordingly, this rulemaking is not subject to the 
provisions of the UMRA.

J. Congressional Review Act

    The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs has determined 
that this rule is not a ``major rule'' as defined by the Congressional 
Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2).

K. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995

    This rule will not impose additional reporting or recordkeeping 
requirements under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. 3501 
et seq.

List of Subjects for 29 CFR Part 31

    Administrative practice and procedure, Civil rights, Equal 
employment opportunity, Grant programs.

    For the reasons set forth in the preamble, the Department of Labor 
amends 29 CFR part 31 as follows:

PART 31--NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR--EFFECTUATION OF TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS 
ACT OF 1964

0
1. The authority citation for part 31 is revised to read as follows:

    Authority:  42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq., 42 U.S.C. 501, 29 U.S.C. 
49k, 5 U.S.C. 301; E.O. 14281, 90 FR 17537.

0
2. Amend Sec.  31.3 by:
0
a. Removing and reserving paragraph (b)(2);
0
b. Revising paragraph (b)(3);
0
c. Removing and reserving paragraph (b)(6);
0
d. Revising paragraph (c); and
0
e. Removing paragraph (d).
    The revisions read as follows:

Sec.  31.3  General standards.

* * * * *
    (b) * * *
    (3) In determining the site or location of facilities, a recipient 
or applicant may not make selections with the purpose of excluding 
individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to 
discrimination under any program to which this regulation applies, on 
the ground of race, color or national origin; or with the purpose of 
defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the 
objectives of the Act or this regulation.
* * * * *
    (c) Employment practices. Where a primary objective of the Federal 
financial assistance to a program to which this regulation applies is 
to provide employment, a recipient may not (directly or through 
contractual or other arrangements) subject an individual to 
discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in its 
employment practices under such program including recruitment, 
examination, appointment, training, promotion, retention or any other 
personnel action.

0
3. Revise Sec.  31.12(a)(1) to read as follows:

Sec.  31.12  Effect on other regulations; supervision and coordination.

    (a) * * *
    (1) Executive Orders 10925 and 11114 and regulations issued 
thereunder,
* * * * *

Dean Heyl,
Assistant Secretary of the Office of Administration and Management.
[FR Doc. 2026-13371 Filed 7-1-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4510-04-P