[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 124 (Tuesday, June 30, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 39506-39512]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-13198]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

40 CFR Part 180

[EPA-HQ-OPP-2022-0980; FRL-13253-01-OCSPP]

Fluoxapiprolin; Pesticide Tolerances

AGENCY: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: This regulation establishes tolerances for residues of 
fluoxapiprolin in or on the food and feed commodities of brassica head 
and stem vegetables (group 5-16); bulb vegetables (subgroups 3-07A and 
3-07B); cucurbit vegetables (group 9); fruiting vegetables (group 8-
10); leafy vegetables (group 4-16); leaf petiole vegetables (subgroup 
22B); lettuce head; small fruit vine climbing, except fuzzy kiwifruit 
(subgroup 13-07F); and tuberous and corm vegetables (subgroup 1C). 
Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), Bayer 
CropScience submitted a petition to EPA requesting these tolerances.

DATES: This rule is effective on June 30, 2026. Objections and requests 
for hearings must be received on or before August 31, 2026 and must be 
filed in accordance with the instructions provided in 40 CFR part 178 
(see also Unit I.C. of this document.)

ADDRESSES: The docket for this action, identified by docket 
identification (ID) number EPA-HQ-OPP-2022-0980, is available online at 
 https://www.regulations.gov . Additional information about dockets 
generally, along with instructions for visiting the docket in person, 
is available at  https://www.epa.gov/dockets .

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Charles Smith, Registration Division 
(7505T), Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental Protection Agency, 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20460-0001; telephone number: 
(202) 566-1030; email address:   [email&#160;protected]  .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Executive Summary

A. Does this action apply to me?

    You may be potentially affected by this action if you are an 
agricultural producer, food manufacturer, or pesticide manufacturer. 
The following list of North American Industrial Classification System 
(NAICS) codes is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather provides a 
guide to help readers determine whether this document might apply to 
them:
      Crop production (NAICS code 111).
      Animal production (NAICS code 112).
      Food manufacturing (NAICS code 311).
      Pesticide manufacturing (NAICS code 32532).
    If you have any questions regarding the applicability of this 
action to a particular entity, consult the person listed under FOR 
FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT.

B. What is EPA's authority for taking this action?

    EPA is issuing this rulemaking under section 408 of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), 21 U.S.C. 346a. FFDCA section 
408(b)(2)(A)(i) allows EPA to establish a tolerance (the legal limit 
for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food) only if EPA 
determines that the tolerance is ``safe.'' FFDCA section 
408(b)(2)(A)(ii) defines ``safe'' to mean that ``there is a reasonable 
certainty that no harm will result from aggregate exposure to the 
pesticide chemical residue, including all anticipated dietary exposures 
and all other exposures for which there is reliable information.'' This 
includes exposure through drinking water and in residential settings 
but does not include occupational exposure. FFDCA section 408(b)(2)(C) 
requires EPA to give special consideration to exposure of infants and 
children to the pesticide chemical residue in establishing a tolerance 
and to ``ensure that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will 
result to infants and children from aggregate

[[Page 39507]]

exposure to the pesticide chemical residue . . .''

C. How can I file an objection or hearing request?

    Under FFDCA section 408(g), 21 U.S.C. 346a(g), any person may file 
an objection to any aspect of this regulation and may also request a 
hearing on those objections. If you fail to file an objection to the 
final rule within the time period specified in the final rule, you will 
have waived the right to raise any issues resolved in the final rule. 
You must file your objection or request a hearing on this regulation in 
accordance with the instructions provided in 40 CFR part 178. To ensure 
proper receipt by EPA, you must identify the docket ID number EPA-HQ-
OPP-2022-0980 in the subject line on the first page of your submission. 
All objections and requests for a hearing must be in writing and must 
be received by the Hearing Clerk on or before August 31, 2026.
    EPA's Office of Administrative Law Judges (OALJ), in which the 
Hearing Clerk is housed, urges parties to file and serve documents by 
electronic means only, notwithstanding any other particular 
requirements set forth in other procedural rules governing those 
proceedings. See ``Order Urging Electronic Filing and Service,'' dated 
December 3, 2025, which can be found at  https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2025-12/2025-12-03-order-urging-electronic-filing-and-service.pdf . Although EPA's regulations require submission via U.S. 
Mail or hand delivery, EPA intends to treat submissions filed via 
electronic means as properly filed submissions; therefore, EPA believes 
the preference for submission via electronic means will not be 
prejudicial. When submitting documents to the OALJ electronically, a 
person should utilize the OALJ e-filing system at  https://yosemite.epa.gov/OA/EAB/EAB-ALJ_Upload.nsf/HomePage?ReadForm .
    In addition to filing an objection or hearing request with the 
Hearing Clerk as described in 40 CFR part 178, please submit a copy of 
the filing (excluding any Confidential Business Information (CBI)) for 
inclusion in the public docket at  https://www.regulations.gov . Follow 
the online instructions for submitting comments. Do not submit 
electronically any information you consider to be CBI or other 
information whose disclosure is restricted by statute. If you wish to 
include CBI in your request, please follow the applicable instructions 
at  https://www.epa.gov/dockets/commenting-epa-dockets#rules  and clearly 
mark the information that you claim to be CBI. Information not marked 
confidential pursuant to 40 CFR part 2 may be disclosed publicly by EPA 
without prior notice.

II. Summary of Petitioned-For Tolerance

    In the Federal Register of July 5, 2023 (88 FR 42935) (FRL-10579-
05-OCSPP), EPA issued a document pursuant to FFDCA section 408(d)(3), 
21 U.S.C. 346a(d)(3), announcing the filing of a pesticide petition (PP 
2F9005) by Bayer CropScience, 800 N Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis, MO 
63167. The petition requested that EPA establish tolerances in 40 CFR 
part 180 for residues of the fungicide fluoxapiprolin in or on tuberous 
and corm vegetables subgroup 1C at 0.01 parts per million (ppm); onion, 
bulb subgroup 3-07A at 0.03 ppm; onion, green subgroup 3-07B at 2.0 
ppm; lettuce, head at 0.8 ppm; leafy vegetable group 4-16, except head 
lettuce at 5.0 ppm; brassica head and stem vegetable group 5-16 at 0.8 
ppm; fruiting vegetable group 8-10 at 0.06 ppm; cucurbit vegetable 
group 9 at 0.06 ppm; small fruit vine climbing subgroup 13-07F, except 
fuzzy kiwifruit at 0.2 ppm; grape, raisin at 0.4 ppm; leafy petiole 
vegetable subgroup 22B at 1.5 ppm as primary crops; and in or on low 
growing berry subgroup 13-07G at 0.01 ppm as rotational crops. That 
document referenced a summary of the petition that was prepared by the 
petitioner, which is available in the docket at  https://www.regulations.gov , docket ID number EPA-HQ-OPP-2022-0980. There were 
no comments received in response to the notice of filing.
    Based upon review of the data supporting the petition and in 
accordance with its authority under FFDCA section 408(d)(4)(A)(i), EPA 
is establishing tolerances for onion, green subgroup 3-07B; vegetable, 
cucurbit, group 9; vegetable, leafy, group 4-16; and grape, raisin that 
vary from what the petition requested based on the data. In addition, 
EPA is not establishing a tolerance for low growing berry subgroup 13-
07G for the indirect rotational crop usage. The reasons for these 
changes are explained in Unit IV.C.

III. Final Tolerance Action

A. Aggregate Risk Assessment and Determination of Safety

    Section 408(b)(2)(A)(i) of FFDCA allows EPA to establish a 
tolerance (the legal limit for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a 
food) only if EPA determines that the tolerance is ``safe.'' Section 
408(b)(2)(A)(ii) of FFDCA defines ``safe'' to mean that ``there is a 
reasonable certainty that no harm will result from aggregate exposure 
to the pesticide chemical residue, including all anticipated dietary 
exposures and all other exposures for which there is reliable 
information.'' This includes exposure through drinking water and in 
residential settings but does not include occupational exposure. 
Section 408(b)(2)(C) of FFDCA requires EPA to give special 
consideration to exposure of infants and children to the pesticide 
chemical residue in establishing a tolerance and to ``ensure that there 
is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result to infants and 
children from aggregate exposure to the pesticide chemical residue . . 
. .''
    Consistent with FFDCA section 408(b)(2)(D), and the factors 
specified therein, EPA has reviewed the available scientific data and 
other relevant information in support of this action. EPA has 
sufficient data to assess the hazards of and to make a determination on 
aggregate exposure for fluoxapiprolin, including exposure resulting 
from the tolerances established by this action. EPA's assessment of 
hazards, exposures, and risks associated with fluoxapiprolin follows.

B. Toxicological Profile

    EPA has evaluated the available toxicity data and considered its 
validity, completeness, and reliability as well as the relationship of 
the results of the studies to human risk. EPA has also considered 
available information concerning the variability of the sensitivities 
of major identifiable subgroups of consumers, including infants and 
children.
    Fluoxapiprolin is a piperidinyl-thiazole-isoxazoline fungicide used 
to control oomycete diseases in a variety of vegetable and vine crops. 
Fluoxapiprolin has an oxysterol binding protein inhibitor pesticidal 
mode of action, but a mammalian mode of action has not been determined. 
Across the fluoxapiprolin database, there were no adverse effects seen 
in guideline studies. No developmental or maternal toxicity was 
observed up to the limit dose in developmental toxicity studies in rats 
and rabbits. In a rat two-generation reproduction toxicity study, no 
toxicity was observed up to the highest doses tested (262/302 mg/kg/day 
(M/F)), which were selected based on toxicokinetic data. In the 
developmental and reproduction toxicity studies, there was no 
indication that fluoxapiprolin had an adverse effect on fetal or 
offspring development, fertility, or reproductive performance. In the 
carcinogenicity studies, fluoxapiprolin was not found to be 
carcinogenic in rats or mice and was not mutagenic. Based

[[Page 39508]]

on the lack of toxicity in the available fluoxapiprolin toxicity 
database, no toxicological points of departure (POD) have been 
established to evaluate incidental oral, dermal, or inhalation exposure 
scenarios for fluoxapiprolin human health risk assessment.
    In the toxicological database for fluoxapiprolin, a 28-day oral 
toxicity study in rats examining an aerobic soil degradate of 
fluoxapiprolin, BCS-BP32808, is available. Decreased total motor 
activity and piloerection in males and females was observed at 12 mg/
kg/day (no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) was 5 mg/kg/day), 
indicating that the degradate BCS-BP32808 is more toxic than the 
parent. Additionally, BCS-BP32808 was positive for mutagenicity in a 
bacterial reverse mutation assay but did not induce gene mutations in 
an in vitro mammalian cell gene mutation test. BCS-BP32808 showed a 
positive response in the in vitro chromosomal aberration assay. 
However, when BCS-BP32808 was tested in vivo, it did not induce 
micronuclei in the mouse micronucleus test up to non-cytotoxic doses. 
Lastly, BCS-BP32808 was negative for the induction of mutations in vivo 
in the liver and glandular stomach of transgenic mice. Therefore, there 
is low concern for mutagenicity for BCS-BP32808 in vivo.
    The toxicological database for fluoxapiprolin is considered 
complete and adequate for hazard identification, characterization, and 
risk assessment. Fluoxapiprolin was categorized as having low acute 
toxicity via the oral (Toxicity Category III), dermal (Toxicity 
Category III), and inhalation routes (Toxicity Category IV) of 
exposure. It produces minimal but reversible eye irritation (Toxicity 
Category IV). It is not a dermal irritant but is a dermal sensitizer.

C. Toxicological Points of Departure/Levels of Concern

    Once a pesticide's toxicological profile is determined, EPA 
identifies toxicological PODs and levels of concern to use in 
evaluating the risk posed by human exposure to the pesticide. For 
hazards that have a threshold below which there is no appreciable risk, 
the toxicological POD is used as the basis for derivation of reference 
values for risk assessment. PODs are developed based on a careful 
analysis of the doses in each toxicological study to determine the dose 
at which the NOAELs are observed and the lowest dose at which adverse 
effects of concern (the LOAEL) are identified. Uncertainty/safety 
factors are used in conjunction with the POD to calculate a safe 
exposure level, generally referred to as a population-adjusted dose 
(PAD) or a reference dose (RfD), and a safe margin of exposure (MOE). 
For non-threshold risks, the Agency assumes that any amount of exposure 
will lead to some degree of risk. Thus, the Agency estimates risk in 
terms of the probability of an occurrence of the adverse effect 
expected in a lifetime. For more information on the general principles 
EPA uses in risk characterization and a complete description of the 
risk assessment process, see  https://www.epa.gov/science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/assessing-human-health-risk-pesticides .
    Based on the lack of toxicity in the available fluoxapiprolin 
toxicity database, no toxicological PODs have been established for 
fluoxapiprolin. More detailed information on the toxicological 
endpoints for the degradate of fluoxapiprolin, BCS-BP32808, used for 
human health risk assessment can be found in the document 
``Fluoxapiprolin: Human Health Risk Assessment to Support the 
Registration of a New Active Ingredient for Proposed Uses on Brassica 
Head and Stem Vegetables; Bulb Vegetables; Cucurbit Vegetables; 
Fruiting Vegetables; Leafy Vegetables; Leaf Petiole Vegetables; Small 
Fruit Vine Climbing, Except Fuzzy Kiwifruit; and Tuberous and Corm 
Vegetables'' (hereafter, the Fluoxapiprolin Human Health Risk 
Assessment) in docket ID number EPA-HQ-OPP-2022-0980 at  https://www.regulations.gov .

D. Exposure Assessment

1. Dietary Exposure From Food and Feed Uses
    In evaluating dietary exposure to fluoxapiprolin, EPA considered 
exposure under the petitioned-for tolerances. EPA assessed dietary 
exposures from fluoxapiprolin as follows:
    i. Acute and chronic exposure. Quantitative acute dietary exposure 
and risk assessments are performed for a food-use pesticide if a 
toxicological study has indicated the possibility of an effect of 
concern occurring as a result of a 1-day or single exposure. No acute 
or chronic effects were identified in the toxicological studies for 
fluoxapiprolin; however, such effects were identified for the degradate 
of fluoxapiprolin, BCS-BP32808. In estimating the acute and chronic 
dietary exposure, EPA used the Dietary Exposure Evaluation Model 
software with the Food and Commodity Intake Database (v 4.02). This 
software uses the food consumption information from the United States 
Department of Agriculture's 2005-2010 National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey, What We Eat in America. As to residue levels in 
food, EPA conducted unrefined acute and chronic dietary exposure 
assessments based on the recommended tolerance for fluoxapiprolin for 
onion, green subgroup 3-07B, which are high enough to cover residues 
for the degradate, BCS-BP32808. BCS-BP32808 was only identified and 
quantifiable in green onion samples, and the tolerance level for onion, 
green subgroup 3-07B is higher than the BCS-BP32808 residue levels of 
the individual green onion samples. Both the acute and chronic 
assessments assume 100 percent crop treated (PCT), default processing 
factors, and incorporate conservatively modeled estimated drinking 
water concentrations (EDWC) of BCS-BP32808.
    ii. Cancer. Based on its review of available data, EPA has 
concluded that fluoxapiprolin is not likely to be carcinogenic. 
Therefore, a dietary exposure assessment for the purpose of assessing 
cancer risk is unnecessary.
    iii. Anticipated residue and PCT information. EPA did not use 
anticipated residue and/or PCT information in the acute or chronic 
dietary exposure assessment for BCS-BP32808. Tolerance level residues 
and/or 100 PCT were assumed.
    The Agency addressed exposures from the three major routes (oral, 
dermal, and inhalation) and determined whether the individual exposures 
from these routes can be combined. If two or more exposures have 
endpoints based on the same target organ or system, they can be 
combined. Toxicity was seen only for the degradate BCS-BP32808. 
Therefore, BCS-BP32808 was used for establishing residues of concern 
(ROC) in primary crops, rotational crops, and drinking water for risk 
assessment purposes. For livestock commodities, no residues are 
included in the ROCs for risk assessment purposes. No endpoints were 
selected for fluoxapiprolin, thus there is no need to consider 
combining routes of exposures to that compound. As identified earlier, 
the BCS-BP32808 degradate has been identified for toxicological 
effects. No endpoints were selected for dermal and inhalation exposures 
for BCS-BP32808, thus these routes cannot be combined.
    For fluoxapiprolin, the nature of the residue is adequately 
understood based on plant and livestock metabolism studies. In the 
metabolic profile in plants, the parent compound represented the most 
prominent residue in above-ground parts of crops (grapes and lettuce), 
whereas metabolites that have been formed in soil were mainly

[[Page 39509]]

detected in potato tuber. The predominant residues observed in primary 
crops were also observed in rats. The metabolic pathway of 
fluoxapiprolin in rats, poultry (laying hens), and ruminants (goats) 
was similar.
    Field trial studies are of an adequate number and geographic 
representation. The magnitude of the residue data show that when 
following the proposed use patterns, parent fluoxapiprolin is the most 
widely observed compound and comprises most of the residues. Due to its 
hazard, BCS-BP32808, has been identified as the ROC for risk assessment 
in primary crop plants. While it was not observed in the lettuce, 
grape, or potato metabolism studies, it was observed at quantified 
levels in the green onion residue trials. The unrefined acute and 
chronic dietary exposure analyses are based on the recommended 
tolerance for fluoxapiprolin for onion, green subgroup 3-07B, which are 
high enough to cover residues for BCS-BP32808. Additionally, both 
assessments assume 100 PCT and incorporate conservatively modeled EDWCs 
of BCS-BP32808.
2. Dietary Exposure From Drinking Water
    The Agency used screening-level water exposure models in the 
dietary exposure analysis and risk assessment for fluoxapiprolin in 
drinking water. These simulation models take into account data on the 
physical, chemical, and fate/transport characteristics of 
fluoxapiprolin. Further information regarding EPA drinking water models 
used in pesticide exposure assessment can be found at  https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/models-pesticide-risk-assessment .
    Determination of the ROCs for human health in drinking water 
included consideration of fluoxapiprolin and the degradate BCS-BP32808. 
The drinking water ROC is limited only to the granddaughter degradate 
BCS-BP32808 and does not include the parent fluoxapiprolin. 
Fluoxapiprolin is classified as hardly mobile, while the degradate BCS-
BP32808 is classified as highly mobile. For the drinking water ROC for 
BCS-BP32808, the aerobic soil metabolism half-lives range from 3.8 to 
28.7 days (non-persistent to slightly persistent). Aerobic and 
anaerobic aquatic metabolism half-lives range from 14 to 56.2 days and 
85.5 to 108 days in the total system, respectively.
    Based on the Pesticides in Water Calculator (PWC; version 2.001), 
the EDWCs of degradate BCS-BP32808 for acute dietary exposures are 
estimated to be 1.0 [micro]g/L for surface water and 1.2 [micro]g/L for 
groundwater. EDWCs for chronic dietary exposures are estimated to be 
0.2 [micro]g/L for surface water and 1.0 ug/L for groundwater. The 
modeled maximum EDWCs were incorporated into the dietary exposure 
model.
3. From Non-Dietary Exposure
    The term ``residential exposure'' is used in this document to refer 
to non-occupational, non-dietary exposure (e.g., from lawn and garden 
pest control, indoor pest control, termiticides, and flea and tick 
control on pets). Fluoxapiprolin is not registered for any use patterns 
that are expected to result in residential exposure.
4. Cumulative Effects From Substances With a Common Mechanism of 
Toxicity
    Section 408(b)(2)(D)(v) of FFDCA requires that, when considering 
whether to establish, modify, or revoke a tolerance, the Agency 
consider ``available information'' concerning the cumulative effects of 
a particular pesticide's residues and ``other substances that have a 
common mechanism of toxicity.''
    In 2016, EPA's Office of Pesticide Programs released a guidance 
document, ``Pesticide Cumulative Risk Assessment: Framework for 
Screening Analysis''. The Agency has utilized this framework for 
fluoxapiprolin and determined that although fluoxapiprolin shares some 
chemical and/or toxicological characteristics (e.g., chemical structure 
or apical endpoint) with other pesticides, the toxicological database 
does not support a testable hypothesis for a common mechanism of 
action. No further data are required to determine that no common 
mechanism of toxicity exists for fluoxapiprolin and other pesticides 
and no further cumulative evaluation is necessary for fluoxapiprolin. 
For information regarding EPA's efforts to determine which chemicals 
have a common mechanism of toxicity and to evaluate the cumulative 
effects of such chemicals, see EPA's website at  https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/pesticide-cumulative-risk-assessment-framework .

E. Safety Factor for Infants and Children

1. In General
    FFDCA section 408(b)(2)(C) provides that EPA shall apply an 
additional tenfold (10X) margin of safety for infants and children in 
the case of threshold effects to account for prenatal and postnatal 
toxicity and the completeness of the database on toxicity and exposure 
unless EPA determines based on reliable data that a different margin of 
safety will be safe for infants and children. This additional margin of 
safety is commonly referred to as the Food Quality Protection Act 
(FQPA) Safety Factor (SF). In applying this provision, EPA either 
retains the default value of 10X, or uses a different additional safety 
factor when reliable data available to EPA support the choice of a 
different factor.
2. Prenatal and Postnatal Sensitivity
    The available toxicity database for fluoxapiprolin does not show 
any evidence of neurotoxicity, including in the acute neurotoxicity 
study. A developmental neurotoxicity study was not required.
    Evidence of potential neurotoxicity was observed in the 28-day oral 
toxicity study conducted on the degradate of fluoxapiprolin, BCS-
BP32808. However, there is a low degree of concern for the potential 
neurotoxic effects since (1) clear NOAELs were identified for the 
neurotoxic effects; and (2) the endpoints chosen for risk assessment 
are protective of any potential neurotoxicity.
3. Conclusion
    For fluoxapiprolin, EPA has not identified any toxicological 
endpoints of concern associated with any threshold effects and has 
conducted a qualitative assessment. As part of that assessment, the 
Agency did not use SFs for assessing risk, and no additional SF is 
needed for assessing risk to infants and children. EPA has also 
evaluated the available data for fluoxapiprolin and concluded that 
there are no residual uncertainties concerning the potential risks to 
infants and children that would impact its conclusions about threshold 
effects.
    For BCS-BP32808, EPA is retaining the 10X FQPA SF for protection of 
infants and children to address hazard uncertainties, including 
incompleteness of the database, prenatal and postnatal toxicity, and 
subchronic to chronic uncertainty. The Agency concludes that this 
safety factor will be protective of potential toxicity to infants and 
children given the conservative exposure estimates and overall low 
expected exposure.

E. Aggregate Risk and Determination of Safety

    EPA determines whether acute and chronic dietary pesticide 
exposures are safe by comparing dietary exposure estimates to the acute 
population adjusted dose (aPAD) and the chronic population adjusted 
dose (cPAD). Short-, intermediate-, and chronic term aggregate risks 
are evaluated by

[[Page 39510]]

comparing the estimated total food, water, and residential exposure to 
the appropriate points of departure to ensure that an adequate MOE 
exists.
    No adverse effects were observed in the submitted toxicological 
studies for fluoxapiprolin regardless of the route of exposure. 
Therefore, a quantitative aggregate exposure assessment was not 
conducted for fluoxapiprolin.
    For the degradate of fluoxapiprolin, BCS-BP32808, the Agency 
characterized the risk of BCS-BP32808 based upon the results observed 
in the 28-day oral toxicity study and conservative exposure assumptions 
as a protective screening measure. Residential exposures to BCS-BP32808 
are not anticipated based on the proposed uses, and no dermal, 
incidental oral, and inhalation endpoints or PODs have been established 
for BCS-BP32808. Therefore, the quantitative dietary assessment of BCS-
BP32808 is considered as a screening-level aggregate exposure 
assessment for BCS-BP32808.
1. Acute Risk
    Using the exposure assumptions discussed in this unit for acute 
exposure, the acute dietary exposure from food and water to 
fluoxapiprolin (BCS-BP32808) will occupy 3.8% of the aPAD for all 
infants, the population group receiving the greatest exposure.
2. Chronic Risk
    Using the exposure assumptions described in this unit for chronic 
exposure, EPA has concluded that chronic exposure to fluoxapiprolin 
(BCS-BP32808) from food and water will utilize less than 1% of the cPAD 
for the general U.S. population, and 1.6% for all infants, the 
population group receiving the greatest exposure. There are no 
residential uses for fluoxapiprolin.
3. Short- and Intermediate-Term Risk
    Short- and intermediate-term aggregate exposure takes into account 
short- and intermediate-term residential exposure plus chronic exposure 
to food and water (considered to be a background exposure level).
    Short- and intermediate-term adverse effects were identified. 
However, fluoxapiprolin is not being proposed to be registered for any 
use patterns that would result in either short- or intermediate-term 
residential exposure. Therefore, the short-term and intermediate-term 
aggregate risks are equivalent to the chronic dietary risk estimates, 
which are not of concern.
4. Aggregate Cancer Risk for U.S. Population
    Based on the evidence of low carcinogenicity in two adequate rodent 
carcinogenicity studies, fluoxapiprolin is not expected to pose a 
cancer risk to humans.
5. Determination of Safety
    Based on the risk assessments and information described above, EPA 
concludes there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result to 
the general population, or to infants and children, from aggregate 
exposure to fluoxapiprolin residues. More detailed information on this 
action can be found in the Fluoxapiprolin Human Health Risk Assessment 
in docket ID number EPA-HQ-OPP-2022-0980.

IV. Other Considerations

A. Analytical Enforcement Methodology

    For analysis of fluoxapiprolin for purposes of regulatory 
enforcement, the petitioner has proposed method 01624 for assessing 
residues on plants and method 01628 for assessing residues on livestock 
products and biproducts. Extracted residue levels are determined by a 
high-performance liquid chromatography/triple-stage quadrupole mass 
spectrometry method. The method limit of quantitation is 0.01 mg/kg 
(ppm). Furthermore, the method is considered acceptable for enforcement 
purposes.

B. International Residue Limits

    In making its tolerance decisions, EPA seeks to harmonize U.S. 
tolerances with international standards whenever possible, consistent 
with U.S. food safety standards and agricultural practices. EPA 
considers the international maximum residue limits (MRLs) established 
by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (Codex), as required by FFDCA 
section 408(b)(4). Codex is a joint United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization/World Health Organization food standards program, and it 
is recognized as an international food safety standards-setting 
organization in trade agreements to which the United States is a party. 
EPA may establish a tolerance that is different from a Codex MRL. 
However, FFDCA section 408(b)(4) requires that EPA explain the reasons 
for departing from the Codex level.
    The Codex has proposed MRLs for fluoxapiprolin on grapes; grapes, 
dried; onion bulb; tomato; and potato. The U.S. tolerances and proposed 
Codex MRLs for the following commodities are harmonized: grape, raisin 
and grapes, dried at 0.5 ppm; onion, bulb, subgroup 3-07A and onion 
bulb at 0.03 ppm; and vegetable, tuberous and corm, subgroup 1C and 
potato at 0.01 ppm. The U.S. tolerance and Codex MRL are not harmonized 
for grapes or vegetable, fruiting, group 8-10 and tomato. EPA is 
establishing a tolerance for fruit, small, vine climbing, except fuzzy 
kiwifruit, subgroup 13-07F at 0.2 ppm, which is higher than the 
proposed individual Codex MRL for grapes at 0.15 ppm. The U.S. 
tolerance is based on available residue data and use by U.S. growers 
consistent with approved label instructions could result in residues 
that exceed the Codex MRL. Harmonizing with the proposed Codex MRL 
could put U.S. growers at risk of violative residues despite legal use. 
EPA is establishing a tolerance for vegetable, fruiting, group 8-10 at 
0.06 ppm, which is lower than the proposed individual Codex MRL for 
tomato at 0.07 ppm. Fluoxapiprolin is being jointly reviewed in the 
U.S. and Canada. For this joint review, the U.S. tolerances and 
Canadian MRLs and associated tolerance expressions are harmonized 
between the U.S. and Canada. While Codex has proposed an MRL for 
tomato, the MRL is not yet established. Mexico has not established any 
fluoxapiprolin MRLs.

C. Revisions to Petitioned-For Tolerances

    The petitioned-for tolerance on onion, green subgroup 3-07B has 
been revised from 2.0 ppm to 2 ppm to remove trailing zeros in 
accordance with Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) rounding class practice. The Agency is establishing a higher 
tolerance level than the petition requested for vegetable, cucurbit, 
group 9 (0.07 ppm instead of 0.06 ppm) and vegetable, leafy, group 4-16 
(6 ppm instead of 5 ppm) based on OECD tolerance calculation 
procedures. The Agency is establishing a tolerance for vegetable, 
fruiting, group 8-10 of 0.06 ppm to harmonize with Canada at that 
level. The Agency is establishing a higher tolerance level than the 
petition requested for grape, raisin (0.5 ppm instead of 0.4 ppm), 
based on the grape highest average field trial data and the raisin 
processing factor. Additionally, EPA is not establishing a tolerance 
for inadvertent residues on berry, low growing, subgroup 13-07G for the 
indirect rotational crop usage since fluoxapiprolin residues in 
strawberry fruit were less than the limit of quantitation (0.010 ppm) 
in a limited field rotational crop study.

[[Page 39511]]

V. Conclusion

    Therefore, a tolerance is established for residues of 
fluoxapiprolin in or on the food and feed commodities of: Fruit, small, 
vine climbing, except fuzzy kiwifruit, subgroup 13-07F at 0.2 ppm; 
Grape, raisin at 0.5 ppm; Leaf petiole vegetable subgroup 22B at 1.5 
ppm; Lettuce, head at 0.8 ppm; Onion, bulb, subgroup 3-07A at 0.03 ppm; 
Onion, green, subgroup 3-07B at 2 ppm; Vegetable, brassica, head and 
stem, group 5-16 at 0.8 ppm; Vegetable, cucurbit, group 9 at 0.07 ppm; 
Vegetable, fruiting, group 8-10 at 0.06 ppm; Vegetable, leafy, group 4-
16, except lettuce, head at 6 ppm; and Vegetable, tuberous and corm, 
subgroup 1C at 0.01 ppm.

VI. Statutory and Executive Order Reviews

    This action is exempt from review under Executive Order 12866 (58 
FR 51735, October 4, 1993), because it establishes or modifies a 
pesticide tolerance or a tolerance exemption under FFDCA section 408 in 
response to a petition submitted to the Agency. The Office of 
Management and Budget has exempted these types of actions from review 
under Executive Order 12866.

A. Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA)

    This action does not impose an information collection burden under 
the PRA 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq., because it does not contain any 
information collection activities.

B. Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)

    Since tolerance actions that are established on the basis of a 
petition under FFDCA section 408(d), such as the tolerances in this 
final rule, do not require the issuance of a proposed rule, the 
requirements of the RFA, 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., do not apply to this 
action.

C. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (UMRA)

    This action does not contain an unfunded mandate of $100 million or 
more (in 1995 dollars and adjusted annually for inflation) as described 
in UMRA, 2 U.S.C. 1531-1538, and does not significantly or uniquely 
affect small governments. The action imposes no enforceable duty on any 
state, local or tribal governments or on the private sector.

D. Executive Order 13132: Federalism

    This action does not have federalism implications as specified in 
Executive Order 13132 (64 FR 43255, August 10, 1999), because it will 
not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship 
between the national government and the States, or on the distribution 
of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government.

E. Executive Order 13175: Consultation and Coordination With Indian 
Tribal Governments

    This action does not have Tribal implications as specified in 
Executive Order 13175 (65 FR 67249, November 9, 2000), because it will 
not have substantial direct effects on Tribal governments, on the 
relationship between the Federal government and the Indian Tribes, or 
on the distribution of power and responsibilities between the Federal 
government and Indian Tribes.

F. Executive Order 13045: Protection of Children From Environmental 
Health Risks and Safety Risks

    This action is not subject to Executive Order 13045 (62 FR 19885, 
April 23, 1997) because tolerance actions like this one are exempt from 
review under Executive Order 12866.
    However, EPA's 2026 Policy on Children's Health applies to this 
action. This rule finalizes tolerance actions under the FFDCA, which 
requires EPA to give special consideration to exposure of infants and 
children to the pesticide chemical residue in establishing a tolerance 
and to ``ensure that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will 
result to infants and children from aggregate exposure to the pesticide 
chemical residue . . .'' (FFDCA 408(b)(2)(C)). The Agency's 
consideration is summarized in Unit III.E.

G. Executive Order 13211: Actions Concerning Regulations That 
Significantly Affect Energy Supply, Distribution or Use

    This action is not subject to Executive Order 13211 (66 FR 28355) 
(May 22, 2001) because it is not a significant regulatory action under 
Executive Order 12866.

H. National Technology Transfer Advancement Act (NTTAA)

    This action does not involve technical standards that would require 
Agency consideration under NTTAA section 12(d), 15 U.S.C. 272.

I. Congressional Review Act (CRA)

    This action is subject to the CRA, 5 U.S.C. 801 et seq., and EPA 
will submit a rule report to each House of the Congress and to the 
Comptroller General of the United States. This action is not a ``major 
rule'' as defined by 5 U.S.C. 804(2).

List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 180

    Environmental protection, Administrative practice and procedure, 
Agricultural commodities, Pesticides and pests, Reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements.

    Dated: June 26, 2026.
Leo Gueriguian,
Acting Director, Office of Pesticide Programs.

    For the reasons set forth in the preamble, EPA is amending 40 CFR 
chapter I as follows:

PART 180--TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES 
IN FOOD

0
1. The authority citation for part 180 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: 21 U.S.C. 321(q), 346a and 371.

0
2. Add Sec.  180.732 to subpart C to read as follows:

Sec.  180.732  Fluoxapiprolin; tolerances for residues.

    (a) General. Tolerances are established for residues of the 
fungicide fluoxapiprolin, including its metabolites and degradates, in 
or on the commodities in table 1 to paragraph (a). Compliance with the 
tolerance levels specified in table 1 to paragraph (a) is to be 
determined by measuring the residues of fluoxapiprolin (2-[3,5-
bis(difluoromethyl)-1H-pyrazol-1-yl]-1-[4-[4-[5-[2-chloro-6-
[(methylsulfonyl)oxy]phenyl]-4,5-dihydro-3-isoxazolyl]-2-thiazolyl]-1-
piperidinyl]ethanone) in or on the commodity.

                        Table 1 to Paragraph (a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Commodity                        Parts per million
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fruit, small, vine climbing, except fuzzy                            0.2
 kiwifruit, subgroup 13-07F........................
Grape, raisin......................................                  0.5
Leaf petiole vegetable subgroup 22B................                  1.5
Lettuce, head......................................                  0.8

[[Page 39512]]

 
Onion, bulb, subgroup 3-07A........................                 0.03
Onion, green, subgroup 3-07B.......................                    2
Vegetable, brassica, head and stem, group 5-16.....                  0.8
Vegetable, cucurbit, group 9.......................                 0.07
Vegetable, fruiting, group 8-10....................                 0.06
Vegetable, leafy, group 4-16, except lettuce, head.                    6
Vegetable, tuberous and corm, subgroup 1C..........                 0.01
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) [Reserved]

[FR Doc. 2026-13198 Filed 6-29-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6560-50-P