[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 127 (Monday, July 6, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 40872-40879]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-13624]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

14 CFR Part 1250

[NASA Document Number: NASA-26-029]
RIN 2700-AE89

Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs of NASA--
Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964

AGENCY: National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: NASA is amending its regulation implementing Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VI) for federally assisted programs to 
conform more closely to the statutory text and recent revisions by the 
Department of Justice (DOJ). This action removes provisions 
establishing disparate-impact liability. The rule also clarifies that 
Title VI reaches employment practices under this part only where 
employment is a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance 
or where intentional discrimination is shown. These changes align 
NASA's regulation with Title VI and promote consistency across Federal 
agencies.

DATES: Effective date: July 6, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Rob Grant, Equal Opportunity Program 
Division, NASA Headquarters, (321) 867-9169.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Executive Summary

    NASA is rescinding portions of its regulations promulgated pursuant 
to Title VI, 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, to more closely align them to the 
statute, which prohibits intentionally discriminatory conduct, see 42 
U.S.C. 2000d. There are serious statutory and constitutional concerns 
with NASA's current Title VI regulations because the current 
regulations go beyond intentional discrimination by prohibiting conduct 
that has an unintentional disparate impact. This rule accordingly 
rescinds those portions of the regulations, which are in considerable 
tension with both the statute and the Constitution and do not 
sufficiently serve the public interest.
    The rule's revisions also conform to Executive Order 14281, 
Restoring Equality of Opportunity and Meritocracy, 90 FR 17537 (Apr. 
23, 2025). That Order states that ``[i]t is the policy of the United 
States to eliminate the use of disparate-impact liability in all 
contexts to the maximum degree possible to avoid violating the 
Constitution, Federal civil rights laws, and basic American ideals.'' 
Id. at 17537. Although NASA would take this action independent of 
Executive Order 14281, the Order supports this action.
    This rule makes clear to NASA's Federal-funding recipients that its 
Title VI regulations prohibit only intentional discrimination, and NASA 
thus will not pursue disparate-impact liability against its Federal-
funding recipients.

II. Discussion

A. Statutory History of Title VI

    Title VI, as amended, provides: ``No person in the United States 
shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded 
from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to 
discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal 
financial assistance.'' 42 U.S.C. 2000d. Title VI also directs Federal 
departments and agencies that extend Federal financial assistance to 
``effectuate the provisions of'' Title VI ``by issuing rules, 
regulations, or orders of general applicability.'' 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1. 
The section of Title VI that sets forth the prohibited conduct, 42 
U.S.C. 2000d, prohibits only intentional discrimination and makes no 
reference to unintentional disparate effects or impact. See Alexander 
v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 280 (2001) (``[I]t is . . . beyond dispute--
and no party disagrees--that [Title VI] prohibits only intentional 
discrimination.''). The statute does not provide any Federal department 
or agency with authority to prohibit conduct having an unintentional 
disparate impact. And despite having ample opportunities, Congress has 
enacted no subsequent amendments to Title VI to impose disparate-impact 
liability.

B. Relevant Supreme Court Decisions

    The Supreme Court has held that Title VI, 42 U.S.C. 2000d, does not 
prohibit facially neutral policies that result in disparate outcomes 
when there is no discriminatory intent. Rather, it prohibits only 
intentional discrimination. In 1978, the Supreme Court held that 
Congress intended Title VI to prohibit ``only those racial 
classifications that would violate the Equal Protection Clause'' if 
committed by a government actor. Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 
438 U.S. 265, 287 (1978) (Powell, J., announcing the judgment of the 
Court); id. at 325, 328, 352-53 (Brennan, White, Marshall, and 
Blackmun, JJ., concurring in part and dissenting in part); see also 
Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President & Fellows of Harvard 
Coll., 600 U.S. 181, 198 n.2 (2023) (``SFFA''). Shortly before Bakke, 
the Supreme Court held that the Equal Protection Clause prohibits only 
intentional discrimination and that ``a law or other official act'' 
that has a ``racially disproportionate impact'' alone does not violate 
that clause. Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239 (1976); see also 
Vill. of Arlington Heights v. Metro. Hous. Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 
265 (1977) (``Proof of racially discriminatory intent or purpose is 
required to show a violation of the Equal Protection Clause.''). Taken 
together, these Supreme Court cases establish that Title VI's statutory 
prohibition, like the Equal Protection Clause, extends only to 
intentional discrimination.
    In 2001, the Supreme Court, in Alexander v. Sandoval, reaffirmed 
that settled understanding. 532 U.S. at 280 (``[I]t is . . . beyond 
dispute . . . that [Title VI] prohibits only intentional 
discrimination.''). In Sandoval, the Supreme Court held that private 
plaintiffs lacked a private right of action

[[Page 40873]]

to enforce DOJ's then-existing ``disparate-impact regulations.'' Id. at 
285-87. Although the Supreme Court had previously found a private cause 
of action to enforce Title VI's bar on intentional discrimination, id. 
at 279-80, that conclusion did not extend to enforcing DOJ's 
``disparate-impact regulations.'' Id. at 285. As the Supreme Court 
explained, it is ``clear'' that ``the disparate-impact regulations do 
not simply apply'' the statutory prohibition, as the regulations 
``forbid conduct that [Title VI] permits,'' so it is equally ``clear 
that the private right of action to enforce [Title VI] does not include 
a private right to enforce these regulations.'' Id. And although the 
Supreme Court in Sandoval ``assume[d],'' without deciding, that DOJ's 
disparate-impact regulations were valid, the Court explained that the 
then-current version of the regulations were in ``considerable 
tension'' with the Supreme Court's Title VI precedents. Similarly, the 
regulations did not ``authoritatively'' construe Title VI because the 
regulations ``forbid conduct''--namely, policies that unintentionally 
result in a disparate impact--that Title VI ``permits.'' Id. at 281-82, 
284-85; see also id. at 286 n.6 (``[Title VI] permits the very behavior 
that the regulations forbid.'').
    Finally, in 2024, the Supreme Court overruled Chevron U.S.A. Inc. 
v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984). See 
Loper Bright Enters. v. Raimondo, 603 U.S. 369, 409-12 (2024). In doing 
so, the Supreme Court made clear that ``statutes . . . have a single, 
best meaning'' that is `` `fixed at the time of enactment.' '' Id. at 
400 (quoting Wis. Cent. Ltd. v. United States, 585 U.S. 274, 284 
(2018)). Thus, Title VI's bar on discrimination can have only one 
meaning. And under Supreme Court precedent, the single, best meaning of 
Title VI is that it ``prohibits only intentional discrimination'' and 
``permits'' facially neutral policies that result in disparate outcomes 
so long as there is no discriminatory intent. Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 
280, 286 n.6.

C. Executive Order 14281

    On April 23, 2025, the President issued Executive Order 14281. This 
Order restates the ``bedrock principle of the United States . . . that 
all citizens are treated equally under the law.'' 90 FR at 17537. The 
Order explains that this ``principle guarantees equality of 
opportunity, not equal outcomes,'' and ``promises that people are 
treated as individuals, not components of a particular race or group.'' 
Id.
    That Order also explains that disparate-impact liability 
``endangers this foundational principle.'' Id. Disparate-impact 
liability, the Order reasons, ``all but requires individuals and 
businesses to consider race and engage in racial balancing to avoid 
potentially crippling legal liability.'' Id. As the Order explains, 
disparate-impact liability ``not only undermines our national values, 
but also runs contrary to equal protection under the law and, 
therefore, violates our Constitution.'' Id.
    The Order relays that because of disparate-impact liability's 
problems, ``[i]t is the policy of the United States to eliminate the 
use of disparate-impact liability in all contexts to the maximum degree 
possible to avoid violating the Constitution, Federal civil rights 
laws, and basic American ideals.'' Id. Accordingly, this rule revises 
NASA's currently existing Title VI regulations, consistent with the 
Order's policy and purpose.
    In any event, NASA would have independently initiated steps toward 
making these changes regardless of Executive Order 14281. Even if 
Executive Order 14281 did not exist, in other words, NASA would have 
taken steps to adopt the policy to eliminate the use of disparate-
impact liability under Title VI. The Order states, and NASA firmly 
agrees, that a ``bedrock principle of the United States is that all 
citizens are treated equally under the law. This principle guarantees 
equality of opportunity, not equal outcomes. It promises that people 
are treated as individuals, not components of a particular race or 
group. It encourages meritocracy and a colorblind society,'' not race-, 
color-, or national-origin-based favoritism. 90 FR at 17537. And 
adherence to this principle, including in the issuance of grants, ``is 
essential to creating opportunity, encouraging achievement, and 
sustaining the American Dream.'' Id.
    Imposing disparate-impact liability endangers these policy 
objectives. Disparate-impact liability also raises serious 
constitutional concerns, is in considerable tension with Title VI, 
creates confusion, increases the costs of compliance, and does not 
serve the public interest. After considering the relevant issues and 
factors and weighing the relevant considerations, NASA concludes that 
these reasons support eliminating disparate-impact liability from 
NASA's Title VI regulations. In any event, NASA concludes that each 
reason is an independent basis for eliminating disparate-impact 
liability from NASA's Title VI regulations.

D. Need for Rulemaking

    14 CFR 1250.103, entitled ``Discrimination prohibited,'' includes 
several provisions that go beyond Title VI and the Constitution by 
prohibiting conduct or activities causing unintentional disparate 
impact. And in some instances, these provisions may encourage or even 
require unlawful discrimination in the form of affirmative action. 14 
CFR 1250.103-2(b) is the current regulation's general disparate-impact 
prohibition, which states that a ``recipient . . . may not . . . 
utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of 
subjecting individuals to discrimination because of their race, color, 
or national origin.'' Beyond that general prohibition, 14 CFR 1250.103-
2(a)(3) addresses a Federal-funding recipient's selection of the site 
or location of facilities and includes two references to ``effect'' 
that extends to conduct with an unintentional disparate impact. 14 CFR 
1250.103-2(e) addresses the use of affirmative action and provides that 
funding recipients may (and sometimes must) use race, color, or 
national origin to overcome unintentional disparate ``consequences.'' 
But this provision does not expressly specify that the funding 
recipient must narrowly tailor such use nor that this use must serve a 
compelling governmental interest, as is required to satisfy strict 
scrutiny. 14 CFR 1250.103-3(d) addresses prohibited discriminatory 
employment practices and extends beyond intentional discrimination to 
prohibiting conduct that ``tends'' to have a discriminatory effect. 
Finally, 14 CFR 1250.103-4(f)-(g) provide two illustrative applications 
of disparate-impact liability.
    There are serious statutory and constitutional concerns with NASA's 
Title VI disparate-impact regulations. NASA also has serious policy 
concerns with its current disparate-impact regulations because they 
create confusion, undermine public confidence in the nation's civil 
rights laws and the rule of law, and produce burdensome litigation and 
compliance costs.
1. Serious Legal Concerns
    There are serious statutory concerns as to whether Title VI 
authorizes the disparate-impact provisions of the current regulations. 
As the Supreme Court has made clear, Title VI prohibits ``only 
intentional discrimination'' and ``permits'' facially neutral policies 
that result in disparate outcomes when there is no discriminatory 
intent. Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 280, 286 n.6. That is the ``single, best 
meaning'' of Title VI. Loper

[[Page 40874]]

Bright, 603 U.S. at 400. Sandoval calls into serious doubt the legality 
of NASA's ``disparate-impact regulations.'' Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 281-
82, 284-85 (noting that DOJ's then-existing regulations were in 
``considerable tension'' with the Supreme Court's Title VI precedents); 
see also id. at 286 n.6 (``[Title VI] permits the very behavior that 
the regulations forbid.'').
    Although Sandoval applied to DOJ's Title VI regulations and 
resolved only the question of private enforceability, subsequent cases 
such as Loper Bright have made clear that NASA cannot extend Title VI 
beyond its best meaning. See 603 U.S. at 412-13 (holding that ``courts 
must . . . ensur[e] that [an] agency acts within'' its statutory 
authority). And even in the absence of Supreme Court precedent, NASA 
would have concluded that the best reading of Title VI is that it 
prohibits only intentional discrimination.
    Title VI authorizes agencies to promulgate regulations ``to 
effectuate'' the statute's prohibition of intentional discrimination. 
42 U.S.C. 2000d-1. The current prohibition of conduct having an 
unintentional disparate impact reaches a vastly broader scope than the 
statute itself. This scope is too broad to be considered a simple 
prophylactic measure aimed at preventing intentional discrimination. 
See Sandoval, 532 U.S. at 286 n.6 (``[Title VI] permits the very 
behavior that the regulations forbid.''). Thus, the disparate-impact 
regulations do not ``effectuate'' Title VI. 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1.
    There are also serious concerns about whether NASA's Title VI 
regulations pass constitutional muster under the Equal Protection 
Clause. As the Supreme Court recently held in SFFA, ``the Equal 
Protection Clause . . . applies without regard to any differences of 
race, of color, or of nationality--it is universal in its application'' 
and the ``guarantee of equal protection cannot mean one thing when 
applied to one individual and something else when applied to a person 
of another color.'' 600 U.S. at 206 (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(first quoting Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 369 (1886); and then 
quoting Bakke, 438 U.S. at 289-90 (Powell, J.)). Despite the promises 
of the Equal Protection Clause, a funding recipient's risk of 
disparate-impact liability under NASA's regulations is triggered by 
unintentional disparate outcomes, which the recipient may not even know 
about without investigation. To evaluate and avoid this risk, the 
funding recipient must incur investigatory costs, such as conducting an 
impact analysis, and is coerced to proactively consider race, color, 
and national origin, and potentially use it to change unintended 
disparate outcomes.
    In short, disparate-impact liability encourages and, in some cases, 
requires covered entities to engage in the intentional use of race and 
racial balancing to eliminate those disparate outcomes by treating 
certain racial groups differently from others--the exact conduct the 
Equal Protection Clause forbids. See id. The serious constitutional 
concerns raised by these perverse incentives further confirm that the 
best reading of Title VI is that it prohibits only intentional 
discrimination and does not authorize NASA to impose disparate-impact 
liability. See Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Fla. Gulf Coast Bldg. & 
Constr. Trades Council, 485 U.S. 568, 575 (1988) (``[W]here an 
otherwise acceptable construction of a statute would raise serious 
constitutional problems, the Court will construe the statute to avoid 
such problems unless such construction is plainly contrary to the 
intent of Congress.'' (citing NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chi., 440 U.S. 
490, 499-501, 504 (1979))).
    This encouraged or coerced use of race, color, or national origin 
violates the Equal Protection Clause unless it survives review under 
the ``daunting'' strict-scrutiny standard. SFFA, 600 U.S. at 206; see 
also Free Speech Coal., Inc. v. Paxton, 145 S. Ct. 2291, 2310 (2025) 
(``Strict scrutiny--which requires a restriction to be the least 
restrictive means of achieving a compelling governmental interest--is 
`the most demanding test known to constitutional law.''' (quoting City 
of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507, 534 (1997))). The use of race, 
color, or national origin necessitated by the disparate-impact 
provisions runs into serious issues with the requirement of narrow 
tailoring to achieve a compelling interest. SFFA, 600 U.S. at 206-07.
    Similarly, the affirmative action provision authorizes and 
sometimes requires the intentional use of race without requiring that 
this intentional use be narrowly tailored to serve a recognized 
compelling interest. Instead, it encourages intentional racial 
balancing to ``overcome the consequences of'' unintended racial 
disparities. 14 CFR 1250.103-2(e). Thus, for substantially the same 
reasons as above, the affirmative action provision raises serious 
constitutional concerns.
    Finally, 14 CFR 1250.103-4(f)-(g) provide illustrative applications 
of disparate-impact liability. Because NASA is removing from its 
regulations the provisions establishing disparate-impact liability, the 
examples of disparate impact are no longer relevant.
    As summarized above, there are serious statutory and constitutional 
concerns with NASA's disparate-impact regulations. But even if the 
regulations were legal, NASA finds that eliminating the potential 
constitutional concerns addressed above would independently justify the 
amendment of the regulations. Cf. U.S. Tel. Ass'n v. FCC, 188 F.3d 521, 
528 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (concluding it was not ``arbitrary and 
capricious'' to adopt a certain policy in order to ``avoid[ ] raising a 
non-trivial constitutional question''). And even if the regulations did 
not raise serious constitutional concerns, NASA finds that eliminating 
the costs and confusion caused by the mismatch between the statute and 
the disparate-impact regulations would independently justify the repeal 
of the regulations.

2. Serious Policy Concerns

    NASA also has serious policy concerns with the imposition of 
disparate-impact liability. Although NASA expresses its policy concerns 
with disparate-impact liability independent of Executive Order 14281, 
that Order sets forth many valid policy concerns with disparate-impact 
liability. As noted in section 1 of the Order,

On a practical level, disparate-impact liability has hindered 
businesses from making hiring and other employment decisions based 
on merit and skill, their needs, or the needs of their customers 
because of the specter that such a process might lead to disparate 
outcomes, and thus disparate-impact lawsuits. This has made it 
difficult, and in some cases impossible, for employers to use bona 
fide job-oriented evaluations when recruiting, which prevents job 
seekers from being paired with jobs to which their skills are most 
suited--in other words, it deprives them of opportunities for 
success.

90 FR at 17537. Moreover, the legal concerns identified above have 
caused uncertainty and confusion for Federal-funding recipients as to 
whether and when they need to comply with the disparate-impact 
regulations and when they can or must consider race, color, and 
national origin. As explained above, Sandoval casts substantial doubt 
on the validity of the disparate-impact regulations that many Federal 
departments and agencies have promulgated pursuant to Title VI. 532 
U.S. at 280-82.

    Additionally in practice, and as explained above, disparate-impact 
liability can lead covered entities to engage in racial balancing even 
as Title VI forbids intentional racial discrimination. This tension 
tends to

[[Page 40875]]

create confusion and undermine public confidence in the nation's civil 
rights laws and in the rule of law itself, as the law seems to both 
forbid and require the same conduct.
    These problems are amplified by the arbitrary nature of the racial 
and ethnic categories typically used to measure disparate effects, 
which, by virtue of their arbitrariness, typically lack a meaningful 
connection to a compelling interest. See, e.g., SFFA, 600 U.S. at 216-
17 (explaining that the ``[racial] categories'' utilized in the racial 
preference programs at issue were ``themselves imprecise in many ways'' 
and ``the use of these opaque racial categories undermine[d], instead 
of promote[d], [their] goals''). This confusion undermines the law's 
ability to teach principles of nondiscrimination. See e.g., 14 CFR 
1250.103-4(f)-(g) (providing illustrations of affirmative action in 
referrals and recruitment). NASA believes that these policy concerns 
independently justify repealing certain parts of its regulation to cure 
this confusion, remove the incentive for covered entities to engage in 
racial balancing, and maintain clarity and public confidence in the 
nation's civil rights laws.
    NASA has considered the view that looking at disparate effects can 
sometimes be useful in uncovering or deterring subtle intentional 
discrimination or intentional indifference to unnecessary and arbitrary 
barriers. But that view's alleged benefits are outweighed by the other 
issues and factors NASA has considered. And in any event, eliminating 
disparate-impact liability does not preclude the use of data on 
disparate outcomes to help prove intentional discrimination. This use 
of statistical disparity to help establish, as an evidentiary matter, 
liability for intentional discrimination materially differs from using 
it to impose liability for conduct having an unintentional disparate 
impact.
    NASA has also considered the alternative of trying to adopt a 
modified version of disparate-impact liability, for example, by 
requiring covered entities to remedy so-called unintentional 
discrimination through a notice-and-remedy model. Such an approach 
might require a recipient to develop and implement a race-neutral 
corrective action plan when a compliance review reveals substantial 
disparities in access or benefits or require targeted, race-neutral 
barrier-removal measures if a periodic audit reveals statistically 
significant disparities of key program outcomes. But any version of 
imposing liability for so-called unintentional discrimination is 
inconsistent with Title VI's original public meaning. Regardless, even 
a modified version of disparate-impact liability would not eliminate 
NASA's serious legal and policy concerns. NASA determines that any 
benefits from adopting alternative versions of disparate-impact 
liability are outweighed by NASA's legal and policy concerns. And even 
if possible, developing such a rule would not solve the confusion or 
rule-of-law concerns expressed above, nor reduce the compliance and 
litigation costs that covered entities face. NASA believes that the 
better course is to avoid the complexities, costs, and litigation 
associated with this alternative, even if eliminating disparate-impact 
liability would ultimately leave some problems unaddressed and others 
inadequately addressed.
    NASA has additionally considered the potential reliance interests 
of funding recipients and others on the disparate-impact regulations. 
Sandoval, however, cast serious doubt on the continuing viability of 
the regulations more than 20 years ago. At least since Sandoval, NASA's 
enforcement of its Title VI disparate-impact regulations has been 
minimal. And Executive Order 14281 also directed all agencies to 
``deprioritize enforcement of all statutes and regulations to the 
extent they include disparate-impact liability,'' including 
specifically NASA's Title VI disparate-impact regulations. 90 FR at 
17538. NASA accordingly believes that any reliance interests should be 
minimal and do not outweigh NASA's legal and other policy concerns. 
Further, each of NASA's concerns, whether considered cumulatively or 
separately, outweighs any reliance interests.
    NASA notes that Sandoval has also led to a divergence between Title 
VI enforcement by private plaintiffs and enforcement by Federal 
departments and agencies. After Sandoval, private plaintiffs can 
enforce only Title VI's statutory prohibition on intentional 
discrimination, while NASA could continue to pursue disparate-impact 
liability. Repealing the disparate-impact regulations would eliminate 
this incongruent enforcement.
    Overall, after considering the relevant issues and factors and 
weighing the relevant considerations, NASA finds that, regardless of 
the legality of NASA's disparate-impact regulations, the above 
summarized policy concerns, when viewed separately or cumulatively, 
independently justify the repeal of its disparate-impact regulations.

III. Regulatory Amendments

A. Comparison of Amendments

    The left column lists the DOJ's Title VI final rule conforming 
amendments, and the right column shows the NASA regulatory text to 
remove.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Section (DOJ 28 CFR 42.104)        Remove (NASA 14 CFR part 1250)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(b)(2)--Disparate impact            1250.103-2(b)--Delete full text of
 ``criteria or methods of            paragraph: ``A recipient, in
 administration''.                   determining the types of services,
                                     financial aid, or other benefits,
                                     or facilities which will be
                                     provided under any such program, or
                                     the class of individuals to whom,
                                     or the situations in which, such
                                     services, financial aid, other
                                     benefits, or facilities will be
                                     provided under any such program, or
                                     the class of individuals to be
                                     afforded an opportunity to
                                     participate in any such program,
                                     may not, directly or through
                                     contractual or other arrangements,
                                     utilize criteria or methods of
                                     administration which have the
                                     effect of subjecting individuals to
                                     discrimination because of their
                                     race, color, or national origin, or
                                     have the effect of defeating or
                                     substantially impairing
                                     accomplishment of the objectives of
                                     the program as respects individuals
                                     of a particular race, color, or
                                     national origin.''
(b)(3)--Facility site selection     1250.103-2(a)(3)--Delete the phrase
 (``purpose vs. effect'').           ``or effect'' in both places within
                                     the section. Current text includes:
                                     ``. . . may not make selections
                                     with the purpose or effect of
                                     excluding individuals from, denying
                                     them the benefits of, or subjecting
                                     them to discrimination under any
                                     program to which this regulation
                                     applies, on the grounds of race,
                                     color, or national origin; or with
                                     the purpose or effect of defeating
                                     or substantially impairing the
                                     accomplishment of the objectives of
                                     the Act or this regulation.''
(b)(6)--``Affirmative action''/     1250.103-2(e)--Delete full text of
 mandatory remedial steps.           paragraphs mandating affirmative
                                     steps to overcome past
                                     discrimination or requiring service
                                     to underrepresented groups.

[[Page 40876]]

 
(c)(2)--Employment practices        1250.103-3(d)--Delete full text of
 (disparate impact reach).           paragraph that extends Title VI to
                                     disparate impact in programs the
                                     primary purpose of which is not
                                     employment: ``Where a primary
                                     objective of the Federal financial
                                     assistance is not to provide
                                     employment, but discrimination on
                                     the grounds of race, color, or
                                     national origin in the employment
                                     practices of the recipient or other
                                     persons subject to the regulation
                                     tends, on the grounds of race,
                                     color, or national origin, to
                                     exclude individuals from
                                     participation in, to deny them
                                     benefits of, or to subject them to
                                     discrimination under any program to
                                     which this regulation applies, the
                                     provisions of paragraph (a) of this
                                     section shall apply to the
                                     employment practices of the
                                     recipient or other persons subject
                                     to the regulation, to the extent
                                     necessary to assure equality of
                                     opportunity to, and
                                     nondiscriminatory treatment of,
                                     beneficiaries.''
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Additionally, NASA is making further changes. First, NASA is 
replacing the defined term ``Applicable'' with ``Applicant'' within 
section 1250.102(b). Additionally, NASA is deleting 14 CFR 1250.103-
4(f)-(g) in their entirety. Finally, NASA is removing 14 CFR 1250.112.

B. Section-By-Section Analysis

14 CFR 1250.102(b)
    14 CFR 1250.102(b) contains a typo regarding the term 
``Applicant,'' which this rule corrects.
14 CFR 1250.103-2(b)
    14 CFR1250.103-2(b) is the general prohibition of conduct having an 
unintentional disparate impact. It imposes liability on Federal-funding 
recipients who ``utilize criteria or methods of administration which 
have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination.'' Because 
14 CFR 1250.103-2(b)'s purpose is to prohibit unintentional disparate-
impact discrimination, this rule deletes this subsection in its 
entirety. It thus amends the regulations to conform to Title VI and to 
address the considerations and determinations described in this 
document. The rule replaces subsection (b) with a placeholder to 
maintain the numbering accuracy of previous citations and other 
references to parts of this section.
14 CFR 1250.103-2(a)(3)
    14 CFR 1250.103-2(a)(3) addresses a Federal-funding recipient's or 
applicant's selection of the site or location of facilities. It 
provides that a funding recipient may not make selections with the 
``purpose or effect'' of discriminating, or ``with the purpose or 
effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of 
the objectives of'' Title VI or NASA's implementing regulations. The 
paragraph's two references to ``effect'' extend its scope to 
unintentional disparate impacts. This rule deletes both ``or effect'' 
references to conform paragraph (a)(3) more closely to Title VI and to 
address the legal and policy considerations and determinations 
described in this document.
14 CFR 1250.103-2(e)
    14 CFR 1250.103-2(e) deals with affirmative action. The second 
sentence--beginning with ``This regulation does not prohibit the 
consideration of race, color, or national origin''--authorizes 
affirmative action even in the absence of a finding of prior 
discrimination in a program ``to remove or over the consequences of 
practices or impediments of practices or impediments which have 
restricted the availability of, or participation in, the program or 
activity receiving Federal financial assistance, on the grounds of 
race, color, or national origin.'' This provision points not to 
intentional discrimination, but rather to the unintentional 
``consequences of practices or impediments.'' It consequently 
encourages intentional racial classifications, racial preferences, and 
other race-based actions without specifying the compelling governmental 
interest and narrow tailoring that the Equal Protection Clause demands. 
This section has long been unlawful under the Equal Protection Clause.
    The third sentence of 14 CFR 1250.103-2(e) provides that ``[w]here 
previous discriminatory practices or usage tends, on the grounds of 
race, color, or national origin, to exclude individuals from 
participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to 
discrimination under any program or activity to which this regulation 
applies the applicant or recipient has an obligation to take reasonable 
action to remove or overcome the consequences of the prior 
discriminatory practice or usage, and to accomplish the purpose of the 
Act.'' This provision goes beyond the Equal Protection Clause, which 
permits, but does not mandate, a government to take narrowly tailored 
action to remedy the effects of its identified past discrimination. 
See, e.g., Bakke, 438 U.S. at 307 (Powell, J.). Moreover, even putting 
aside the mandatory language, this provision does not expressly require 
narrow tailoring to counter particular past discrimination, but rather 
simply ``an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or overcome 
the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice.'' This provision 
accordingly promotes potentially illegal race, color, and national 
origin discrimination. Moreover, in some instances, it may even coerce 
recipients to consider and use racial preferences when the recipient 
may not want to. This is contrary to NASA's goal of promoting and 
defending a culture of nondiscrimination and is destructive to the 
public's understanding of and faith in the nation's civil rights laws. 
This rule, therefore, removes paragraph (e).
14 CFR 1250.103-3(d)
    14 CFR 1250.103-3 addresses prohibited discriminatory employment 
practices. 14 CFR 1250.103-3(a) prohibits intentionally discriminatory 
employment practices in a program when a primary objective of the 
Federal financial assistance that program receives is to provide 
employment. 14 CFR 1250.103-3(d) extends the prohibition on 
discrimination to employment practices of the funding recipient even 
when the financial assistance ``is not to provide employment'' if 
discrimination in the non-funded ``employment practices . . . tends, on 
the ground of race, color, or national origin, to exclude persons from 
participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to 
discrimination under the program receiving Federal financial 
assistance.'' This section prohibits not only intentional 
discrimination but also conduct that ``tends'' to have a discriminatory 
effect.
    Moreover, NASA notes that the extension to employment practices 
where the Federal funding's primary objective is not to provide 
employment conflicts with 42 U.S.C. 2000d-3. That section states that 
``[n]othing contained in [Title VI] shall be construed to authorize 
action under [Title VI] by any department or agency with respect to any 
employment practice of any

[[Page 40877]]

employer, employment agency, or labor organization except where a 
primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is to provide 
employment.'' 42 U.S.C. 2000d-3; see also Johnson v. Transp. Agency, 
Santa Clara Cnty., 480 U.S. 616, 627-28 n.6 (1987) (citing the 
statutory limitation and noting Congress's intent that Title VI not 
``impinge'' on Title VII, which prohibits discriminatory employment 
practices). The rule deletes 14 CFR 1250.103-3(d) to amend the 
regulation so that it more closely adheres to Title VI and to address 
the legal and policy considerations and determinations described in 
this document.
Section 14 CFR 1250.103-4(f)-(g)
    Additionally, 14 CFR 1250.103-4(f)-(g) provide illustrative 
applications of disparate-impact liability. Because NASA is removing 
from its regulations the provisions establishing disparate-impact 
liability, these examples are no longer relevant.
Section 14 CFR 1250.112
    Finally, NASA is removing 14 CFR1250.112 because the provision is 
unnecessary to effectuate 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1. No specific statutory 
provision mandates or necessitates a regulation governing the internal 
coordination and relationships of agency officials. 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1 
directs the agency to issue rules to effectuate the nondiscrimination 
requirements applicable to external recipients of Federal funds. 
Although internal coordination is a necessary component of agency 
operations, a formal regulation is not required to effectuate external 
enforcement; such matters can be handled through internal agency 
management directives. Removing this section ensures that NASA's Title 
VI regulations remain fully aligned with the agency's commitment to 
modernize its regulations by rescinding outdated provisions and text 
that lacks a statutory basis.

IV. Severability

    NASA's position is that each of the amendments described by this 
rule serves a vital, related, but distinct purpose. NASA also confirms 
that each of the amendments is intended to operate independently of 
each other and that the potential invalidity of one amendment should 
not affect the other amendments. NASA would adopt any of the amendments 
independently of the invalidity of a separate amendment.

V. Legal Authority

    This rule is issued under section 602 of Title VI,42 U.S.C. 2000d-
1, and the laws listed in appendix A to part 1250.

VI. Regulatory Certifications

Administrative Procedure Act

    NASA issues this final rule without prior public notice and comment 
or a delayed effective date pursuant to the Administrative Procedure 
Act's exception for rules ``relating to agency management or personnel 
or to public property, loans, grants, benefits, or contracts.'' 5 
U.S.C. 553(a)(2).
    Title VI concerns non-discrimination conditions on the receipt of 
Federal financial assistance, and more particularly to the receipt of 
Federal ``[g]rants and loans,'' ``property,'' ``personnel'' and ``[a]ny 
Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of 
its purposes the provision of assistance.'' 14 CFR 1250.102(d); see 
also 14 CFR 1250.104 (requiring funding recipient sign contractual 
assurance of compliance with Title VI); Cummings v. Premier Rehab 
Keller, P.L.L.C., 596 U.S. 212, 217-18 (2022) (observing that Congress 
enacted Title VI ``[p]ursuant to its authority to `fix the terms on 
which it shall disburse federal money' '' (internal citation omitted)). 
Cf. Education Programs or Activities Receiving or Benefitting from 
Federal Financial Assistance, 82 FR 46655, 46655 (Oct. 6, 2017) 
(invoking the section 553(a)(2) exception to amend Title IX regulations 
to ``promote consistency in the enforcement of Title IX for [the 
Department of Agriculture] financial assistance recipients''); 
Preserving Community and Neighborhood Choice, 85 FR 47899 (Aug. 7, 
2020) (invoking the exception to repeal Housing and Urban Development 
rule regarding Federal grantees); Participation by Minority Business 
Enterprise in Department of Transportation Programs, 53 FR 18285 (May 
23, 1988) (invoking the exception to expand coverage of Department of 
Transportation regulation regarding Federal Aviation Administration's 
airport financial assistance program); Nondiscrimination on the Basis 
of Handicap in Federally Assisted Programs--Suspension of Guidelines 
with Respect to Mass Transportation, 46 FR 40687 (Aug. 11, 1981) 
(invoking the exception to suspend DOJ guidelines regarding prohibiting 
disability discrimination in transportation programs and activities 
receiving Federal financial assistance).
    Indeed, invoking 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(2) is consistent with guidance 
issued by the Office for Management and Budget (OMB) under 2 CFR 200.1, 
which defines ``Federal financial assistance'' with the same categories 
as the Administrative Procedure Act's exception for rules ``relating to 
agency management or personnel or to public property, loans, grants, 
benefits, or contracts,'' 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(2). With potentially limited 
exceptions not applicable to NASA, all the forms of Federal financial 
assistance set forth under 2 CFR 200.1 that NASA administers would fall 
under the ``public property, loans, grants, benefits, or contracts'' 
exception. Thus, NASA issues this final rule without prior public 
notice and comment or a delayed effective date under 5 U.S.C. 
553(a)(2).

Executive Order 12866 and Executive Order 13563 (Regulatory Review)

    NASA has consulted the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs 
(OIRA) pursuant to section 3(f) of Executive Order 12866, Regulatory 
Planning and Review, 58 FR 51735, 51738 (Sep. 30, 1993). Because this 
rule makes conforming edits, aligns with DOJ's Title VI revisions, and 
imposes no new requirements, this final rule is a significant 
regulatory action.
    This regulation has been drafted and reviewed in accordance with 
Executive Order 13563 section 1(b), Improving Regulation and Regulatory 
Review, 76 FR 3821, 3821 (Jan. 18, 2011), which supplements and 
reaffirms the principles of Executive Order 12866. Executive Orders 
12866 and 13563 direct agencies to assess all costs and benefits of 
available regulatory alternatives and, if regulation is necessary, to 
select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits. 58 FR at 
51735; 76 FR at 3821. Executive Order 13563 also recognizes that some 
benefits and costs are difficult to quantify and provides that, where 
appropriate and permitted by law, agencies may consider and discuss 
qualitatively values that are difficult or impossible to quantify. Id.
    As explained in the preamble, the regulatory modifications this 
rule makes are necessary to conform NASA regulations to Executive Order 
14281, address serious legal concerns regarding NASA's Title VI 
regulation based on the Supreme Court's reading of Title VI in 
Sandoval, harmonize the implementing regulation with Title VI, promote 
consistency in enforcement among private plaintiffs and Federal 
departments and agencies, and provide much needed clarity to courts and 
Federal-funding recipients and beneficiaries regarding the scope of 
NASA's Title VI regulations.

[[Page 40878]]

    Data limitations make the costs and benefits of the rule difficult 
to quantify. Although it does not represent the monetary impact of the 
rule, NASA issued approximately 8,202 separate awards totaling 
approximately $6 billion over the past 5 years. NASA does not track 
which of its investigations and compliance reviews involve solely 
allegations of disparate-impact discrimination. For enforcement actions 
that relate to both intentional discrimination and conduct having an 
unintentional disparate impact, NASA does not track and cannot reliably 
quantify the costs attributable to the disparate-impact portions of 
enforcement actions. That the existence of a disparate impact is a 
factor that may be considered in evaluating intentional discrimination 
further impedes monetizing costs and benefits. Therefore, the overall 
cost effect on NASA is difficult to quantify. The deregulatory action 
should decrease NASA's enforcement costs, however. It should also have 
the benefit, albeit difficult to quantify, of bringing NASA's conduct 
in line with the law. Similarly, NASA is unable to quantify how funding 
recipients will respond to the regulatory changes. But the deregulatory 
action should result in greater flexibility and lower compliance costs 
for recipients.
    NASA recognizes that a funding recipient may receive Federal funds 
from sources other than NASA. This deregulatory action does not create 
any new obligations for funding recipients. On the contrary, by 
eliminating disparate-impact liability from the regulation, this rule 
eliminates a source of regulatory confusion, narrows the conduct 
prohibited, and thus lessens the costs of compliance and potential 
liability. Moreover, recipients who receive funds for the same program 
or activity from more than one Federal entity already enter into 
separate contractual assurances with each funding entity, see, e.g., 14 
CFR 1250.104. These contractual assurances impose varying requirements 
that each Federal funding source deems necessary. Funding recipients 
will continue to be held to the most stringent contractual assurance 
and regulation. And in any event, NASA notes that other agencies are 
currently amending their regulations to align with the changes made in 
this rule, so NASA anticipates that there will be little, if any, 
disparity in federal requirements regarding disparate-impact liability 
going forward.
    Based on the analysis of the practical qualitative costs and 
benefits noted above, NASA believes that this rule is consistent with 
the principles of Executive Orders 12866 and 13563, including the 
requirements that, to the extent permitted by law, NASA adopt a 
regulation only upon a reasoned determination that its benefits justify 
its costs and choose a regulatory approach that maximizes net benefits. 
See 58 FR at 51735; 76 FR at 3821.

Executive Order 14192 (Unleashing Prosperity Through Deregulation)

    Executive Order 14192 requires an agency, unless prohibited by law, 
to identify at least 10 existing regulations to be repealed when the 
agency publicly proposes for notice and comment or otherwise 
promulgates a new regulation. 90 FR 9065, 9065 (Jan. 31, 2025). In 
furtherance of this requirement, section 3(c) of the Order requires 
that ``any new incremental costs associated with new regulations shall, 
to the extent permitted by law, be offset by the elimination of 
existing costs associated with at least 10 prior regulations.'' Id. 
This rule eliminates unnecessary regulation by revising NASA's current 
Title VI regulations, which extend prohibited conduct to include 
unintentional disparate impacts and thus expand the scope of those 
regulations to a vastly broader range of conduct than the statute 
prohibits. Accordingly, NASA considers this rule to be a deregulatory 
action under Executive Order 14192.

Executive Order 14294 (Fighting Overcriminalization in Federal 
Regulations)

    NASA has reviewed this rule under Executive Order 14294 and 
determined that it does not create or modify any criminal regulatory 
provisions; accordingly, Executive Order 14294 does not apply.

Executive Order 13132 (Federalism)

    NASA analyzed this rule under Executive Order 13132 and determined 
it does not have federalism implications because it does not have 
substantial direct effects on the States, alter the relationship 
between the national government and the States, or affect the 
distribution of power and responsibilities among levels of government. 
Accordingly, no federalism summary impact statement is required.

Executive Order 12988 (Civil Justice Reform)

    This final rule has been reviewed in accordance with Executive 
Order 12988. It meets applicable standards to minimize litigation, is 
written clearly, and has no retroactive effect.

Regulatory Flexibility Act

    NASA certifies that this final rule will not have a significant 
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities because it 
removes provisions and clarifies the scope of existing requirements 
without adding new compliance obligations.

Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (UMRA)

    This rule does not contain Federal mandates that may result in the 
expenditure by State, local, or Tribal governments, in the aggregate, 
or by the private sector, of $100 million or more in any one year; 
therefore, sections 202 and 205 of UMRA do not apply.

Congressional Review Act (CRA)

    NASA will submit the rule and the required reports to Congress and 
the Government Accountability Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801. OIRA has 
determined that this final rule is not a ``major rule'' under 5 U.S.C. 
804(2).

Paperwork Reduction Act

    This final rule contains no new or revised information collection 
requirements subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 
3501 et seq.).

Executive Order 12250

    Pursuant to section 1-202 of Executive Order 12250, DOJ has the 
responsibility to ``review . . . proposed rules . . . of the Executive 
agencies'' implementing nondiscrimination statutes such as Title VI in 
order to identify those which are inadequate, unclear or unnecessarily 
inconsistent.'' Additionally, section 1-101 of Executive Order 12250 
delegated the President's responsibility to approve Title VI 
regulations to the Attorney General. See 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1. DOJ has 
reviewed and approved this rule.

List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 1250

    Administrative practice and procedure, Civil rights, Equal 
employment opportunity, Grants programs.
    For the reasons stated in the preamble, NASA amends 14 CFR part 
1250 as follows:

PART 1250--NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERALLY-ASSISTED PROGRAMS OF 
NASA-EFFECTUATION OF TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964

0
1. The authority citation for part 1250 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: Sec. 602, 78 Stat. 252, 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1; and the 
laws listed in appendix A to this part.

[[Page 40879]]

Sec.  1250.102  [Amended]

0
2. In Sec.  1250.102(b), remove the word ``Applicable'' and add in its 
place ``Applicant.''

Sec.  1250.103-2  [Amended]

0
3. In Sec.  1250.103-2:
0
a. In paragraph (a)(3), remove the words ``or effect'' wherever they 
appear.
0
b. Remove paragraphs (b) and (e).
0
c. Redesignate paragraphs (c) and (d) as paragraphs (b) and (c).

Sec.  1250.103-3  [Amended]

0
4. In Sec.  1250.103-3, remove paragraph (d).

Sec.  1250.103-4  [Amended]

0
5. In Sec.  1250.103-4, remove paragraphs (f) and (g).

Sec.  1250.112  [Removed]

0
6. Remove Sec.  1250.112.

Jamie Krauk,
Director, Office of the Executive Secretariat (OES).
[FR Doc. 2026-13624 Filed 7-2-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 7510-13-P