[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 124 (Tuesday, June 30, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 39516-39528]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-13155]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 4

[PS Docket Nos. 21-346 and 15-80; ET Docket No. 04-35 FR ID 351629]

Resilient Networks; Concerning Disruptions to Communications

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission

[[Page 39517]]

(Commission) modernizes the Disaster Information Reporting System 
(DIRS) to reduce reporting burdens on stakeholders and ensure that the 
information being collected is useful for disaster response. Our 
modernization allows manual filers to submit a single, dynamic form 
instead of multiple worksheets, and enables them to use a ``one-click'' 
option to easily indicate there is no change from the previous day's 
report. Further, unnecessary fields and worksheets will be eliminated 
to ensure that DIRS is collecting the information that is most 
important for emergency response. This modernization also eliminates 
the requirement for service providers to file a DIRS final report 
within 24 hours of DIRS' deactivation, and exempts non-facilities-based 
providers from DIRS reporting. This document also recognizes the 
emergence of public safety voice and broadband networks and the 
critical connectivity they provide to public safety stakeholders by 
requiring providers of these services to submit DIRS reports on the 
status of their public safety network infrastructure. Finally, we 
augment providers' ability to voluntarily submit geospatial information 
on infrastructure affected by disasters. Together, these changes 
provide public safety officials with the additional information they 
need, while also making it easier for service providers to satisfy 
their reporting obligations.

DATES: Effective June 30, 2026, except for amendatory instruction 3 (47 
CFR 4.18), which is delayed indefinitely. The Commission will publish a 
document in the Federal Register announcing the effective date.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jeanne Stockman, Attorney Advisor, 
Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau at (202) 418-7830 or 
  [email&#160;protected]  .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Third 
Report and Order (Third Report and Order), FCC 26-34, adopted May 20, 
2026, and released May 21, 2026. The full text of this document is 
available by downloading the text from the Commission's website at: 
 https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-modernizes-disaster-information-reporting-system-0 . The full text of this document is available for 
public inspection and copying during regular business hours in the FCC 
Reference Center, 45 L Street NE, Washington, DC 20554. To request 
materials in accessible formats for people with disabilities (Braille, 
large print, electronic files, audio format), send an email to 
  [email&#160;protected]   or call the Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau at 
202-418-0530 (voice).

Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

    The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), requires 
that an agency prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis for notice-
and-comment rulemaking proceedings, unless the agency certifies that 
``the rule will not, if promulgated, have a significant economic impact 
on a substantial number of small entities.'' Accordingly, the 
Commission has prepared a Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) 
concerning possible impact of the rule and policy changes contained in 
the Third Report and Order on small entities concerning possible impact 
of the rule and policy changes contained in the Third Report and Order 
on small entities. The FRFA is set forth in Appendix B.

Congressional Review Act

    The Commission has determined, and the Administrator of the Office 
of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, 
concurs, that this rule is ``non-major'' under the Congressional Review 
Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission will send a copy of this Third 
Report and Order to Congress and the Government Accountability Office 
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

Paperwork Reduction Act

    This Third Report and Order may contain new or substantively 
modified information collection requirements subject to the Paperwork 
Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), Public Law 104-13. All such requirements 
will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for 
review under Section 3507(d) of the PRA. OMB, the general public, and 
other federal agencies will be invited to comment on any new or 
modified information collection requirements contained in this 
proceeding. In addition, we note that pursuant to the Small Business 
Paperwork Relief Act of 2002, Public Law 107-198, see 44 U.S.C. 
3506(c)(4), we previously sought specific comment on how the Commission 
might further reduce the information collection burden for small 
business concerns with fewer than 25 employees.

Synopsis

A. Simplifying the DIRS User Interface

    To simplify DIRS for manual filers and make DIRS information more 
useful to emergency managers, we adopt our proposal to redesign the 
DIRS interface to replace the ten separate DIRS worksheets with a 
single, dynamic form as proposed in the FNPRM. Instead of completing a 
series of worksheets that collect overlapping information, manual DIRS 
filers will respond to initial questions about the services they 
provide in the DIRS activation area and the impacts to equipment and 
facilities caused by the disaster. Based upon these responses, manual 
filers will be presented with questions seeking information applicable 
only to the services the filer provides. Information that currently 
appears on multiple worksheets would only need to be entered once. 
While, as we noted, manual filers comprise a minority of providers that 
submit DIRS reports, many providers that manually file DIRS reports are 
small- or medium-sized businesses, and so this change will have an 
outsized effect in reducing burdens for providers whose resources may 
be most thinly stretched during a disaster.
    The record supports our view that this step will simplify and 
reduce the time burden associated with manual data entry in DIRS. The 
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association observes that the 
current DIRS reporting framework is cumbersome and inefficient with 
many overlapping data fields. Accordingly, CTIA and others describe 
this, along with other measures we adopt today, as ``common sense 
changes that would reduce burdens on providers, allowing them to direct 
resources towards recovery efforts without impacting the actionable 
information provided to public safety stakeholders through DIRS 
reports.'' The National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) agrees that 
this redesign ``will facilitate filing in DIRS during a disaster[,]'' 
and NTCA adds that it will ``benefit public safety agencies by allowing 
them to more quickly identify the status of communications in their 
area.'' The Competitive Carriers Association (CCA) observes that these 
changes address a concern that is ``particularly acute for small and 
rural carriers. Such providers often operate with limited engineering 
and operations teams, many of whom are simultaneously engaged in damage 
assessment, power restoration, and physical repairs.'' No commenters 
oppose this proposal or express concern that its adoption would 
diminish DIRS's utility.

B. Establishing a ``One-Click'' Filing Option

    In the interest of reducing the burdens of required DIRS reporting 
and encouraging participation for voluntary DIRS filers, we adopt our 
proposal to establish a ``one-click'' option on the consolidated 
worksheet for providers to

[[Page 39518]]

indicate there is no change in infrastructure status from the previous 
day's report. Commenters agree that this would reduce time spent on 
manual DIRS entry while preserving the value of DIRS for emergency 
management officials. USTelecom states that a one-click option will 
``improve the efficiency'' of disaster-related data collection, and an 
individual commenter describes this change as ``monumental.'' In 
addition to saving time and streamlining DIRS report preparation, NAB 
believes this change ``would facilitate broadcasters' voluntary 
participation in DIRS, especially smaller stations.'' As reflected in 
these comments, we believe this step will simplify manual DIRS report 
submission during DIRS activations, while also enabling providers to 
have more time to focus on the important task of restoring service to 
their customers.
    We decline to extend the availability of a one-click-like option to 
batch filers, in addition to manual filers, as recommended by WISPA--
The Association for Broadband Without Boundaries (WISPA). To satisfy 
their DIRS reporting obligations, batch filers already enjoy a 
streamlined filing process whereby they upload a provider-created 
spreadsheet to the Commission, the production of which may be automated 
by network administration systems. We disagree with WISPA that 
implementing the equivalent of one-click filing will enable batch 
filers to complete their DIRS filing obligation more easily than simply 
resubmitting the previous day's spreadsheet. We believe that a one-
click (or near one-click) option would require substantially similar 
effort and time for DIRS batch filers as using the existing spreadsheet 
upload process, particularly for those users that leverage the DIRS 
Upload Application Programming Interface (API). Further, in our 
experience, batch filers are more likely to be larger entities 
providing service through many facilities in a broader geographic area 
than manual filers. As a result of the number of facilities on which 
batch filers report and the dynamic nature of service restoration 
during and after disasters, DIRS information for batch filers is very 
likely to change day-over-day, making a one-click option less useful 
for these types of filers.
    While no commenter opposes the Commission's proposal, one commenter 
requests that the Commission have ``a way to ensure that [] providers 
aren't actually skipping the daily report and are in fact checking 
their data to see it hasn't changed.'' We recognize this valid concern. 
As an initial matter, we note that providers are under an obligation to 
report information truthfully to the Commission. To remind providers of 
the requirement to submit accurate information, we will also add the 
following language to DIRS, which the user will be required to 
acknowledge when clicking ``submit'': ``By submitting this Form, you 
certify that the information you have provided on this Form and the 
attachments is true and accurate. Filers are responsible for the 
accuracy of the information they file with the Commission, including 
any data automatically populated into this Form or its attachments from 
other Commission databases. Failure to ensure the accuracy of 
information filed with the Commission may result in enforcement 
action.'' We believe this language puts providers further on notice 
that it is their responsibility to verify the accuracy of the 
information in their reports. We expect that this language will prompt 
providers to review any existing data before submitting their DIRS 
report.

C. Eliminating Unnecessary DIRS Fields and Worksheets

    To further streamline DIRS reporting for both manual and batch 
filers, we eliminate many DIRS reporting fields and worksheets, as 
proposed in the FNPRM. The record affirms our view that the worksheets 
and fields we eliminate today are unnecessary because they are 
duplicative and/or provide little of actionable value for disaster 
response. We summarize the remaining DIRS fields that will be mandatory 
or voluntary to complete in Appendix C.
    Eliminate the Inter-exchange Carrier (IXC) Blocking Worksheet. We 
eliminate the inter-exchange carrier worksheet, agreeing with ACA 
Connects which observes that the worksheet ``has not proven useful for 
disaster response.'' No commenters oppose this action.
    Eliminate the ``Percent of Historical Capacity Available'' Field 
from the Wireless Cell Site by County Worksheet. We eliminate the 
``percent of historical capacity available'' field from the Wireless 
Cell Site by County worksheet because this field is redundant as the 
information it contains can be derived from other reported data. As 
explained by CTIA, ``[t]he Commission has access to the relevant 
information provided in [this field] through other means, such as by 
measuring capacity based on the number of sites reported in operation 
or out of service.'' We agree, and find that since the Commission has 
the ability to calculate this percentage from other data reporting in 
DIRS, it is appropriate to eliminate this field from the worksheet. No 
commenters disagree with this conclusion.
    Consolidate Cable Telephone Subscriber Data Fields. Rather than 
eliminate DIRS' reporting fields for cable telephony, as proposed, we 
consolidate the fields for cable communications providers that request 
(1) the number of cable telephone subscribers served and (2) the number 
of VoIP subscribers served with (3) the number of cable telephony 
subscribers down and (4) the number of VoIP subscribers whose service 
is down. As a result of this action, cable communications service 
providers will be required to respond to only two prompts: how many 
cable telephony and/or VoIP subscribers do you serve, and how many of 
them are without service? Based on data reported in NORS and DIRS over 
the past year, cable communications service providers themselves often 
appear to be unsure whether to report voice outages as VoIP or cable 
telephony, resulting in inconsistent and unreliable reporting for 
outages of each type. Moreover, the difference between cable telephony 
provided via a circuit-switched network and cable telephony provided 
via VoIP is often not material from an emergency management standpoint. 
We agree with ACA Connects that eliminating the need for providers to 
discern between these two types of service in their DIRS reports 
``would substantially reduce the time burdens associated with DIRS data 
entry without compromising DIRS's mission.'' This action is also 
consistent with CTIA's advocacy that we eliminate duplicative fields in 
DIRS. We take this action to improve DIRS reporting efficiency and to 
save service providers precious time in DIRS reporting when their 
primary focus is on disaster recovery and restoring service to 
customers. No commenters oppose this action.
    Eliminate Video Subscriber Data Fields from the Cable System and 
Major Equipment Worksheets. We remove the fields currently in the cable 
system and major equipment worksheet that request the number of video 
subscribers served and the number whose service is down to, consistent 
with NCTA's comments, ``facilitate more efficient reporting by 
providers and [to] help maximize the time and resources that are 
available for network restoration.'' NAB and ACA Connects support our 
taking this step because this information is less critical for disaster 
response, and no commenters oppose this action.
    Eliminate the ``Number of Access Lines'' field from the Major 
Equipment Worksheet. We eliminate the ``number of access lines'' field 
from the existing

[[Page 39519]]

major equipment worksheet because, as noted in the FNPRM, this 
information is addressed by other questions on the same worksheet that 
are better targeted to gathering useful information. Specifically, the 
major equipment worksheet requests the ``number of working numbers'' 
and the ``number of working numbers down.'' While there can be multiple 
working telephone numbers on a single access line, we do not believe it 
is necessary for disaster response to collect both types of data. We 
believe it reasonable to use ``working numbers down'' as a proxy for 
affected customers. Moreover, this field, in combination with the 
``number of working numbers'' field, yields important information about 
how much of a provider's customer base is without service. ACA Connects 
supports our eliminating this field step because this information is 
covered elsewhere on the existing major equipment worksheet, and no 
commenters oppose our taking this step.
    Harmonize Fields on the Interoffice Facilities--TSP worksheet with 
NORS. We update the fields on the existing interoffice facilities--TSP 
worksheet by collecting information about the number of Optical Carrier 
circuits (or their functional equivalent) affected and eliminating the 
requirement to report the ``number of DS3s affected (down).'' For the 
avoidance of doubt, we emphasize that we are not eliminating required 
reporting for circuits that are smaller than an OC3. Required reporting 
on OC3s or functional equivalents will include DS3s, for example, that 
are transporting volumes of traffic that are the functional equivalent 
of an OC3. We find this important to keep pace with marketplace changes 
that have added capacity to today's high-speed networks. USTelecom--The 
Broadband Association (USTelecom) supports harmonizing fields that 
currently exist on this worksheet as we proposed in the FNPRM, and no 
commenters disagreed with this modification.
    Make Reporting the Number of Remote Aggregation Devices Voluntary. 
We make it voluntary, rather than mandatory, for providers to report 
the number of remote aggregation devices that are down as provided on 
the existing remote aggregation devices worksheet. We find that other 
fields on the current worksheet, specifically the ``number of working 
numbers served'' and ``number of working numbers down,'' collect more 
useful information about customer impact and pace of service 
restoration than the ``number of [remote aggregation devices] . . . 
down'' field. We believe we can further our goal of simplifying DIRS 
without sacrificing useful information for public safety stakeholders 
by making this field voluntary. While this will provide an incremental 
time savings to those providers that elect not to complete this field 
in DIRS, it will enable providers to continue to share this 
information. ACA Connects supports our rationale for this conclusion 
and no commenters object to proceeding in this manner.
    Make Broadband Data User Fields Voluntary. We make the collection 
of broadband access user information voluntary, rather than mandatory, 
for all DIRS filers except fixed and mobile broadband providers that 
are stage 2 recipients of the Uniendo a Puerto Rico Fund and Connect 
USVI Fund, as we proposed and as supported by NCTA, CCA, and ACA 
Connects. This step preserves the collection, on a voluntary basis, of 
information that is important to public safety stakeholders, as 
broadband access is a critical lifeline enabling the public to stay 
informed during disasters and emergencies, while still reducing burdens 
on providers. As CCA notes, adopting streamlining measures like this 
``ensure[s] providers can maximize their recovery efforts [while] 
critical information is shared with relevant emergency management 
entities.'' The record supports this modification and no commenters 
disagree with this step.
    Retain Voluntary DIRS Reporting for Satellite Providers. As a means 
of maintaining visibility into critical infrastructure during 
disasters, we decline to adopt our proposal in the FNPRM to eliminate 
the fields on satellite services. CTIA stated it ``[did] not have any 
specific concerns about eliminating the satellite worksheet.'' 
Notwithstanding the fact that Verizon ``does not oppose'' exempting 
satellite providers from DIRS reporting, Verizon observes that 
``wireless and wireline providers' customers may rely in part on 
satellite capabilities during DIRS activations'' and wireless and 
wireline providers have limited visibility into the status of satellite 
providers' networks. While acknowledging that no satellite provider has 
ever filed in DIRS, the National Rural Electric Cooperatives 
Association notes that public safety officials, the Commission, and the 
public deserve ``to have the best information available'' in the event 
of a ``powerful solar storm, `Kessler Syndrome' ablation cascade, or a 
disaster of a type yet unknown[ ]'' affects satellite service. We agree 
that it is possible that a disaster that specifically affects satellite 
services could create a need for the Commission to activate DIRS; 
however, were we to eliminate the satellite worksheet fields as 
proposed, we would be unprepared to receive daily infrastructure status 
updates from satellite operators, even on a voluntary basis. In light 
of the key role satellite service plays to enable other modes of 
communications and to support national security interests, we are 
persuaded to retain the worksheet.
    We decline, however to make satellite reporting in DIRS mandatory 
at this time as recommended by the Foundation for Defense of 
Democracies in consideration of the increasing threats from China and 
the importance of these systems to the economy and military operations. 
We believe retaining the worksheet on a voluntary basis strikes the 
appropriate balance of enabling public safety officials to receive 
satellite status information through DIRS in the event there is a 
disaster that impacts satellite service, without burdening satellite 
providers with mandatory reporting obligations for circumstances that 
have not yet come to pass in the history of DIRS. The Commission 
continues to retain visibility into satellite network status through 
satellite providers' ongoing mandatory obligation to report outages in 
NORS. Our approach ensures that the Commission will remain informed of 
significant impairments to satellite connectivity, preserves the 
ability for satellite providers to voluntarily report in DIRS should an 
unforeseen event warrant such reporting, all while avoiding burdening 
satellite providers with new mandatory reporting obligations.
    Allow Providers Flexibility in Providing Location Information. We 
decline to adopt our proposal to improve the utility of DIRS data by 
requiring providers to submit location information for their affected 
equipment or facilities in a single format, either street address or 
latitude and longitude. While ACA Connects notes submitting ``street 
addresses would be significantly less burdensome than the submission of 
latitude/longitude data[,]'' no other stakeholder or public safety 
entity indicates that one format is preferable to the other for any 
given type of facility or equipment. Instead, industry commenters ATIS, 
CTIA, NTCA, and Verizon argue that providers should continue to be 
allowed to select their preferred format for any type of facilities or 
equipment. NTCA argues that maintaining our current approach would 
minimize ``the time providers must spend completing DIRS reports.'' We 
find that continuing to allow providers to choose which address format 
to use for equipment and facilities location reporting is appropriate 
because, as CTIA points out, equipment located in rural or remote

[[Page 39520]]

areas may not have a street address at all, and requiring providers to 
convert information that they maintain as a street address into a 
latitude and longitude would, as ATIS observes, result in ``significant 
impacts on the industry.''
    We find that previous delegations of authority to the Bureau are 
sufficiently broad to enable it to implement these modifications, as 
well as future modifications to DIRS and its fields that may be needed 
to ensure that the system continues to serve its crucial role in 
disaster response and recovery. As noted in the FNPRM, the Commission 
has delegated authority to the Bureau ``to administer the 
communications disruption reporting requirements contained in part 4 of 
this chapter and to revise the filing system and template used for the 
submission of such communications disruption reports.'' While no 
commenter challenges this delegation, some commenters seek to require 
the Bureau to exercise its delegated authority ``subject to 
consultation with wireless service providers'' or limited to ``what is 
expressly authorized in the final rules.'' We find it unnecessary to 
revise the authority delegated to the Bureau in this manner. The 
revision to Sec.  4.18(a) that we adopt today will contain more 
specificity for PSHSB to implement as it revises the DIRS filing system 
and templates. We further find that it is necessary for the Bureau's 
authority to be sufficiently broad to ensure that the Bureau has the 
flexibility to timely implement lawful changes to DIRS and otherwise 
maintain the system as necessary to ensure that it remains effective.
    We direct the Bureau to afford providers an opportunity to test the 
above improvements to DIRS before they are officially released, as 
recommended by Verizon. This process will also allow filers to provide 
additional feedback on the new DIRS interface to ensure usability. We 
decline, however, to require the Bureau to engage in a second round of 
notice and comment on the look and feel of the new DIRS system, as 
suggested by USTelecom, ATIS, AT&T, CTIA, and WISPA. While formal 
notice and comment was appropriate to address the information that 
providers are required to file in DIRS because those changes affect 
their legal obligations, no such formality is needed to enable the 
Bureau to consider feedback from industry on its implementation of the 
changes contemplated herein.

D. Eliminating the DIRS Final Report

    As proposed in the FNPRM, we eliminate the requirement for 
providers to file a final report in DIRS within 24 hours of DIRS' 
deactivation. Many commenters argue that DIRS final reports are not 
useful to emergency managers. ATIS, WISPA, and WTA submit that the 
primary reason DIRS final reports have not been as useful in practice 
as the Commission intended is the ``uncertainty and unknowns that will 
still exist right after the end of the DIRS reporting period,'' which 
prevent providers from offering reliable, actionable service 
restoration estimates. We agree. In our experience, DIRS final reports 
have not provided emergency managers with reliable service restoration 
estimates, which must be made when DIRS is deactivated. Moreover, we 
understand from experience that the timeline for service restoration 
can depend on factors outside of the service provider's control, such 
as the accessibility of the damaged area to service technicians or the 
availability of replacement parts, so it is not sensible to refer to 
estimates provided in the midst of an emergency as ``final.'' As such, 
we disagree with the Foundation for Defense of Democracies that the 
DIRS final report ``ensur[es] accountability and provid[es] a 
definitive record for planning repairs and analyzing outages.'' As we 
reasoned in the FNPRM, service restoration estimates that routinely 
prove incorrect cause more harm than good because reliance on those 
estimates leads to the misallocation of finite disaster response 
resources. Taking more time to consider the potential utility of these 
requirements, as Public Knowledge suggests we should, cannot change the 
fundamental difficulty of presenting DIRS information to emergency 
managers as ``final'' as if service providers can predict the future. 
Further, we are not persuaded to retain the DIRS final report 
requirement by Public Knowledge's vague assertion that, even if this 
information is not valuable for immediate situational awareness, it has 
value as ``historic information for analysis and planning.'' We also do 
not believe it would be beneficial to retain a streamlined version of 
the DIRS final report requirement that providers could satisfy with 
``one-click.'' If the Bureau believes that an additional day of DIRS 
reporting on infrastructure status was warranted before DIRS's 
deactivation, it can obtain that information simply by keeping DIRS 
active for an additional day.

E. Exempting Non-Facilities-Based Providers From DIRS Reporting

    To eliminate duplicative and potentially speculative DIRS reporting 
about infrastructure neither owned nor operated by the reporting 
entity, we revise our mandatory DIRS rules to apply only to facilities-
based providers, exempting providers that do not own or operate their 
own facilities or infrastructure in the DIRS activation area. We agree 
with CTIA that providers that do not own or operate their own 
facilities or infrastructure should not report in DIRS because ``their 
service offerings rely on the facilities of underlying service 
providers that already report the status of those facilities'' in DIRS. 
In our experience, information that non-facilities-based providers 
submit in DIRS about the status of facilities or infrastructure that 
they do not own or operate tends to be either be speculative, as ACA 
Connects and NCTA observe, or derivative of information that the non-
facilities-based provider has imposed upon the facilities-based 
provider to obtain, as WISPA observes. We agree with CTIA and T-Mobile 
that receiving information about the status of the same communications 
equipment from both the facilities-based provider that owns and 
operates that equipment and from non-facilities-based providers that 
rely upon that equipment to offer service introduces a risk of double 
counting that threatens the quality of DIRS data. It will promote our 
ability to quickly and reliably produce aggregated information about 
the status of communications equipment during disasters to receive one 
authoritative report about each relevant communications facility in a 
DIRS activation area, and we agree with ACA Connects that the report we 
receive should come from the party ``with direct visibility into the 
outage and system restoration.'' That provider will be in the best 
position to answer DIRS' prompts about the status of the facilities or 
infrastructure. Eliminating reporting requirements for other providers 
will result in more accurate data and remove unnecessary burdens from 
industry.
    NCTA recommends that we extend the exemption for non-facilities-
based providers to NORS for the same reasons as we offer it in the 
context of DIRS. We reject this recommendation and continue to require 
mobile virtual network operators and wireless, wireline, and 
interconnected VoIP resellers to report outages in NORS. As the 
Commission has previously found, these providers are ``uniquely 
positioned to provide information on

[[Page 39521]]

outages affecting their customers.'' Unlike DIRS reporting's focus on 
``infrastructure status'' during and after disasters, non-facilities-
based providers are in the best position to report in NORS about the 
effects of outages on their subscribers because they have visibility 
into the status of their own subscribers, while the underlying 
facilities-based providers on which they rely often do not. The 
Commission also relies on NORS reporting as a source of information 
about the root causes of all kinds of network outages and the impacts 
of those outages on end users, which leads ``to the development of best 
practices and has fostered a `data-driven, self-improvement model.' '' 
By maintaining the requirement that non-facilities-based providers 
report in NORS, the Commission preserves its insight into the impact of 
outages on the millions of non-facilities-based provider subscribers 
nationwide.
    We do not adopt the FNPRM's proposal to require facilities-based 
wireless providers to report in DIRS which mobile virtual network 
operators utilize their respective networks within the DIRS activation 
area, nor do we adopt the alternative that mobile virtual network 
operators identify their underlying network providers as part of a 
limited DIRS filing. Public Knowledge observes that there is not 
necessarily a simple, direct relationship between the operational 
status of a facilities-based provider and a non-facilities-based 
provider that relies upon it. As CTIA also recognizes, non-facilities-
based providers often utilize the networks of multiple facilities-based 
providers in delivering their service. As a result, we are concerned 
that a list of business relationships alone would be insufficient to 
enable emergency managers to derive actionable insights about a 
disaster's impacts on their community, irrespective of whether a 
facilities-based or non-facilities-based provider submits it. While 
there are undoubtedly examples of non-facilities-based providers that 
rely exclusively on a single facilities-based provider to offer 
service, significant risk would stem from inducing emergency managers 
to believe that this is always the case by requiring the disclosure of 
business relationships as a proxy for the availability of service to 
communities. While Public Knowledge argues that this complexity is 
grounds for the Commission to continue require non-facilities-based 
providers to report in DIRS, we conclude that the burdens of filing 
this information outweigh its public safety value.

F. Voluntarily Collecting More Information on Where Facilities Are Out 
of Service

    We direct the Bureau to upgrade DIRS to improve the ability of 
filers to voluntarily submit geographic information about service areas 
and the locations of facilities that are out of service. As Public 
Knowledge puts simply, collecting more granular information for 
stakeholders ``can improve their disaster response.'' In the FNPRM, we 
specifically sought comment on whether to collect more granular 
information from wireless providers about the location of cell sites 
that are out of service. Whereas DIRS requires providers to specify the 
location of major equipment other than wireless cell sites, DIRS 
currently only requires wireless providers to complete a worksheet to 
specify the number of cell sites out by county. Wireless providers, 
however, have voluntarily submitted more granular information than DIRS 
requires about the location of their wireless cell sites. T-Mobile 
voluntarily provides cell site location data in Keyhole Markup 
Language. As ATIS observes, one major wireless provider has voluntarily 
submitted shape files in response to DIRS activation since 2017, which 
provide ``information about cell site impacts on a very conservative 
measure of -98db.'' Accordingly, we agree with CTIA that collecting 
mapping data from service providers during DIRS activation on a 
voluntary basis is an approach that is working well, and we therefore 
do not require providers to submit any additional mapping data at this 
time. While providing this information in DIRS is voluntary, the Bureau 
may still exercise its delegated authority to require providers to 
provide this information in appropriate circumstances.
    However, we recognize that DIRS does not offer an easy way for 
providers to voluntarily submit geographic information about service 
coverage and infrastructure location and believe that expanding that 
capability may induce more providers to submit that information and 
make DIRS easier to use for providers that do submit that information. 
We do not limit the submission of geographic information solely to cell 
site locations, but allow it for any kind of geographic information 
that filers believe would be useful to provide to emergency managers. 
We believe this flexibility was warranted in light of Verizon, CCA, and 
other commenters arguments that ``[c]overage, not site location, is 
most relevant to where Wireless Emergency Alerts, 911 calls and public 
safety-related communications are affected during disaster events.'' 
Upgrading DIRS to offer providers a clear way to submit a wider array 
of geographic information in additional formats may also reduce burdens 
on providers and other stakeholders.

G. Requiring DIRS Reporting for Public Safety Voice and Broadband 
Network Operators

    To ensure that emergency managers and first responders have the 
information they need to stay connected during disasters, we require 
public safety voice and broadband network operators to submit DIRS 
daily reports about their infrastructure status when the Commission 
activates DIRS in geographic areas where they provide service. Public 
safety voice and broadband networks now play a vital role in keeping 
first responders connected during emergency response. AT&T manages and 
operates a nationwide public safety voice and broadband network, 
FirstNet, which plays a key role in enabling first responders using the 
network to communicate with one another and with PSAPs during 
emergencies. As the National Regional Planning Council states, public 
safety officials increasingly use FirstNet to replace older Land Mobile 
Radio systems for communication among first responders during 
emergencies. First responders use FirstNet for voice-over LTE, rich 
communication services and IP-based messaging to communicate with one 
another from a variety of operational locations, including outdoors, 
inside buildings, through drones and satellites, from airborne vehicles 
like helicopters, and from onboard maritime vessels. First responders 
also rely on FirstNet's network to access key technologies that affect 
situational awareness, such as cameras that convey real-time or 
historical data; internet-connected devices and sensors that monitor 
weather, traffic, environmental issues, or access to secured locations; 
and maps and Geographic Information Systems that may provide the 
location of responders or assets, potential hazards, or relational 
information between personnel and assets. According to Verizon, its 
Frontline service prioritizes first responder communications on 
Verizon's 5G network and provides high speed, low latency, large 
capacity connectivity to over 45,000 agencies. T-Mobile USA, Inc.'s (T-
Mobile) T-Priority service prioritizes data-intensive communications 
for public safety agencies by using 5G network slicing to enable law 
enforcement, fire protection,

[[Page 39522]]

emergency medical services, and other first responders to respond to 
emergencies. Disruptions to services like FirstNet, Verizon Frontline, 
or T-Priority could be a matter of life and death for first responders 
or members of the public who rely on police, fire, and emergency 
medical services that subscribe to these services.
    The FNPRM sought comment on whether the Commission should revamp 
DIRS to enable voluntary or mandatory reporting on the status of public 
safety voice and broadband networks. The Commission also proposed to 
require FirstNet to report in DIRS in 2024, and received significant 
support. As Public Knowledge, Communications Workers of America, and 
New America's Open Technology Institute observed, effective crisis 
response ``can only happen if those responding to the crisis--and 
managing the response--have clear knowledge of the communications 
environment in as close to real time as possible.'' NASUCA and TURN 
recognized that FirstNet's ``unique purpose [is] to provide robust 
public safety communications and, by extension, carry some of the most 
life-saving information across public safety stakeholders when 
disasters strike.'' And Next Century Cities observed that, ``without 
mandatory DIRS or NORS reporting the Commission and state and local 
officials are left without critical information about how the 
nation[']s emergency services are connected.'' We agree with these 
views and find that DIRS reports are inadequate for providing 
actionable infrastructure status information if they do not 
specifically identify impacts to public safety voice and broadband 
network customers and efforts to restore service for public safety 
customers. Moreover, government stakeholders commonly request that the 
FCC share DIRS reports about FirstNet, but no public safety voice and 
broadband network operator has voluntarily provided information 
specific to the status of those network functions in their DIRS reports 
to date. Mandatory DIRS reporting will close this gap and provide 
critical visibility and situational awareness into these vital public-
safety networks during disasters, consistent with the Commission's 
reasoning for previously requiring other types of providers to file in 
DIRS.
    AT&T and Verizon oppose making public safety voice and broadband 
network reporting mandatory, asserting such additional reporting is 
unnecessary, duplicative, and may be misleading. With respect to 
FirstNet, AT&T's states that information about FirstNet's network 
status, infrastructure, and assets is already included as part of 
AT&T's DIRS reporting and is provided directly to FirstNet's public 
safety customers via the FirstNet Central platform. Verizon 
acknowledges the Commission's ``legitimate situational awareness 
interest in a wireless outage's impact on public safety users[,]'' but 
is concerned such reporting may double-count infrastructure impacts 
since the same networks are used for commercial and public safety 
purposes, be inaccurate as providers may have different designations 
for what constitutes a public safety customer, and, as AT&T notes, 
likely duplicates information being provided directly to customers. We 
find that mandatory reporting for public safety voice and broadband 
networks in DIRS is both necessary to ensure public safety officials 
can respond during disasters, and, as Verizon observes, will provide 
important situational awareness that does not exist today regarding the 
status of all of these critical networks.
    We find that direct reporting to enterprise customers via 
interfaces such as FirstNet Central is an inadequate substitute for the 
visibility that DIRS reporting will yield. AT&T asserts that FirstNet 
Central provides its users with ``near real-time network status[,]'' 
enabling FirstNet users access to more information [than DIRS], even 
during emergency events that do not rise to the level of a DIRS 
activation. We are unpersuaded by the argument that outage information 
public safety voice and broadband network operators share with public-
safety subscribers obviates DIRS reporting. While a public safety voice 
and broadband network operator may share information about its network 
status relevant to its own customers, not all public safety customers 
subscribe to the same public safety voice and broadband network. During 
a disaster, those customers may need to communicate with public safety 
entities that are customers of a different public safety voice and 
broadband network. Thus, broader visibility to the public safety voice 
and broadband network ecosystem is essential to identify outages that 
may impede seamless communications among customers of all public safety 
voice and broadband networks. Through mandatory DIRS reporting, the 
Commission can aggregate public safety voice and broadband network 
status information for all such networks and provide more comprehensive 
visibility than any single, network-specific outage reporting platform 
like FirstNet Central can provide. While AT&T describes how it and 
``the FirstNet Authority actively engage in state emergency operations 
centers during a disaster,'' state emergency operations centers lack 
access to the aggregated network status available as a result of the 
DIRS reporting requirements we adopt today.
    Other aspects of the outage notifications provided by public safety 
voice and broadband network operators to their customers today further 
demonstrate how those notifications fail to sufficiently accomplish our 
goals. Information that public safety voice and broadband network 
operators report directly to enterprise customers is not available to 
state, Tribal, territorial, or Federal agencies that are not themselves 
FirstNet users. Additionally, while FirstNet Central may provide some 
outage-specific information, T-Mobile observes that FirstNet does not 
provide information within any specific timeframe after an outage 
begins, or update information at any specific interval thereafter. It 
is also unclear whether FirstNet Central provides its customers with 
outage information on a customer-specific basis, or on a larger scale 
such as a region, state, or for its network as a whole. Moreover, it is 
uncertain the extent to which FirstNet Central provides infrastructure 
status in addition to the information it provides on ``operational 
status[.]'' DIRS' inclusion of infrastructure status makes it more 
robust and useful, providing visibility to the damaged equipment that 
would need to be restored to reestablish critical connectivity. Aside 
from FirstNet, the record is silent on whether or how Verizon and T-
Mobile notify Frontline and T-Priority users, respectively, of outages 
on their public safety voice and broadband networks, but no information 
about the operational status of these networks has been reported 
directly to the Commission, nor are we aware of state, Tribal, 
territorial, or Federal agencies that are not themselves Frontline or 
T-Priority users receiving access to this information. Verizon states 
that detailed service availability and restoration information is 
likely already being provided in accordance with contractual terms and 
conditions as part of the provider-enterprise customer relationship, 
but neither definitively states that such communications are, in fact, 
occurring, nor provides any specifics about those communications. 
Accordingly, we find that customer-specific outage communications are 
inadequate substitutes for the visibility and situational awareness 
DIRS reporting will yield for emergency management agencies and the 
Commission.

[[Page 39523]]

    We require public safety voice and broadband network operators to 
file in DIRS irrespective of whether their service is integrated into 
their network or standalone. T-Mobile asserts that only FirstNet and 
other providers of standalone public safety networks should be required 
to report in DIRS, and that T-Mobile, which offers its T-Priority 
service through a dedicated 5G network slice, should be exempt. In our 
view, this distinction is immaterial. Operators of public safety voice 
and broadband networks can prioritize service restoration to those 
networks irrespective of whether they are physically or logically 
diverse. Network slicing allows network administrators to dynamically 
prioritize access (and, potentially, post-outage service restoration) 
to transport, backhaul, and core network functions for public safety 
customers during emergency response and disaster recovery efforts when 
network congestion is more likely to occur. Excluding such offerings 
from the requirement we adopt today would limit our and public safety 
agencies' visibility into the status of these important services based 
on a network architecture distinction that is irrelevant to their 
importance during disasters and emergencies.
    To eliminate the potential for both duplicative reporting burdens 
and ``overstating the physical and user impact of an outage,'' we will 
allow operators of public safety voice and broadband networks to 
satisfy their DIRS reporting obligation by indicating whether the 
status of their public safety voice and broadband network is the same 
as the status of their other network infrastructure. In the event that 
the status is not the same, then we require the fields in DIRS that are 
applicable to that network to be completed to identify specific 
impacts. This approach is consistent with Verizon's proposal for ``a 
simple voluntary Yes/No checkbox field . . . that answers the question 
`Public Safety Voice and Broadband Network Customers Affected?' '' At 
the same time, we find it critical to require these providers to submit 
additional information to help the Commission identify public safety 
communications-specific impacts and restoration information, so we 
require them to submit the information that is appropriate for their 
type of network (e.g., the provider of a wireless public safety voice 
and broadband network shall complete the wireless service provider 
fields in DIRS). This approach strikes a balance that will ensure we 
collect important information about public safety impacts that will 
provide the Commission and our federal, state, Tribal, and territorial 
partners with visibility into the operational status of these networks 
while minimizing new burdens on providers. While Verizon expresses 
concern about the potential for ``apples-to-oranges comparisons between 
providers that have different designations for what constitutes a 
`public safety' entity,'' this does not deter us from our conclusion. 
We think it reasonable that each public safety voice and broadband 
network operator will have eligibility criteria that requires customers 
on their respective networks to have a legitimate public safety purpose 
in order to subscribe. We acknowledge this criteria may not be 
identical across all public safety voice and broadband networks, but 
find this potential variance will not adversely affect our goal of 
capturing impacts to public safety customers. As with the other changes 
we implement today, we delegate authority to the Bureau to integrate 
public safety voice and broadband networks' infrastructure status into 
DIRS reporting.

H. Retaining NORS Reporting Requirements for DIRS-Lite Activations

    At this time, we decline to extend the suspension of NORS reporting 
requirements during DIRS activations to DIRS-Lite activations, which we 
believe is necessary to preserve our visibility into outages that 
result from disasters for which we activate DIRS-Lite. By contrast to 
DIRS activations, the Commission activates DIRS-Lite for disasters that 
are less severe than those warranting a full DIRS activation. In 
anticipation of disaster impacts on communications services that are 
less severe, but that are nonetheless important for local emergency 
managers to understand on a day-to-day basis, the Commission can choose 
to collect infrastructure status information from providers by 
activating DIRS-Lite. When the Commission activates DIRS-Lite, it 
collects infrastructure status information informally, by e[hyphen]mail 
or phone, rather than via DIRS's online interface. All information that 
providers offer to the Commission during a DIRS-Lite activation is 
submitted voluntarily; providers are not required to submit the 
detailed infrastructure status information that DIRS elicits. The daily 
cadence of infrastructure status information during DIRS-Lite 
activations supplements more fulsome information that providers are 
required to report in NORS for outages that meet the Commission's 
reporting thresholds. The Commission has never waived NORS reporting 
requirements during an activation of DIRS-Lite. Accordingly, we 
disagree with ATIS, CTIA, USTelecom, and Verizon that we should waive 
NORS requirements during DIRS-Lite activations.
    We agree with Public Knowledge that suspending NORS filing 
obligations during DIRS-Lite activations could create a gap in the 
Commission's information about network reliability by shifting the type 
of information that the Commission collects from information about 
outage root causes and subscriber impacts to information about 
infrastructure status at the time that network outages are most likely 
to occur. We also agree with Public Knowledge that extending the NORS 
waiver to DIRS-Lite activations may make it necessary for the Bureau to 
annually reconcile NORS filings, DIRS filings, and DIRS-Lite in order 
to maintain a complete picture of network resilience. We believe that 
this would pose significant administrative burdens for the Commission 
that outweigh the benefits of waiving NORS filings. In addition, we are 
not persuaded that DIRS-Lite activations present burdens to providers 
that would meaningfully detract from their service restoration efforts. 
For these reasons, we decline to extend the suspension of NORS 
reporting requirements to DIRS-Lite activations.

I. Compliance Timeframe

    With respect to eliminating the DIRS final report and providing a 
filing exemption for providers that do not own or operate their own 
facilities, neither of these changes will necessitate technical changes 
to DIRS before becoming effective as the providers to which these 
changes apply can simply decline to file the reports in question. 
Accordingly, both changes to our rules shall be effective immediately 
upon publication of this Third Report and Order in the Federal 
Register. In addition to these amendments, the FNPRM proposed 
amendments to section 4.18(a) that specified the types of information 
that providers are required to report in DIRS. See FNPRM and Order on 
Reconsideration, 40 FCC Rcd at 6337. Because these amendments reflect 
information that is currently required to be reported in DIRS and do 
not impose any new obligations on providers, we also make those 
amendments effective immediately upon publication of this Third Report 
and Order in the Federal Register. However, we expect that many of the 
steps that we take today to streamline DIRS, including the creation of 
a dynamic form, the elimination of unnecessary fields, and the creation 
of a field to collect more granular location information, will require 
additional

[[Page 39524]]

time to modify DIRS. We direct the Bureau to implement the necessary 
technical modifications to DIRS to effectuate the improvements 
described in this Report and Order, work with stakeholders to share 
information about and test the improvements to help facilitate any 
modifications to their reporting practices, and release a Public Notice 
to notify stakeholders when those improvements have been implemented.
    We require public safety voice and broadband network operators to 
begin reporting in DIRS on the later of (i) 30 days after the Bureau 
announces that the Office of Management and Budget has completed its 
review of this requirement pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act and 
that DIRS is ready to receive public safety voice and broadband network 
operators' filings; or (ii) November 30, 2026. We believe that this 
approach will provide sufficient time for public safety voice and 
broadband network operators to make any necessary adjustments to their 
existing reporting processes to comply with the new requirement and to 
adjust to DIRS modifications.

J. Assessing the Benefits and Costs

    We conclude that the rules we adopt today to reduce the burdens of 
DIRS reporting on service providers, along with new mandatory DIRS 
reporting requirements for public safety voice and broadband network 
operators, will result in annual cost savings of approximately $4 
million, which outweighs the approximately $176,000 one-time cost and 
the $72,000 annual recurring cost to implement these changes. The 
approximate $4 million benefit estimate includes cost savings of 
$143,000 for streamlining the filing process and eliminating the final 
report requirement for facilities-based voice providers and $3.9 
million from eliminating DIRS reporting obligations for mobile virtual 
network operators and VoIP resellers. The cost estimates include a 
$176,000 one-time cost for DIRS batch filing reconfiguration, and an 
annual cost of $72,000 for public safety voice and broadband networks 
to report outages when DIRS is activated. We find that these net cost 
savings, along with the public safety benefits that will flow from our 
actions will outweigh any new costs and any potential effects on public 
safety from the Commission no longer receiving and sharing certain 
types of infrastructure status information.
    By removing the need for providers to select from the current array 
of ten separate forms concerning different types of service and 
infrastructure, we find that manual filers should be able to complete 
their filings more quickly. In addition, we find that eliminating 
unnecessary and duplicative fields will allow DIRS filings to be 
submitted more quickly. To quantify these cost savings, we use the 
methodology that we proposed in the FNPRM. Consistent with the FNPRM, 
based on staff estimation using the most recent available data, at the 
county-level, there are on average 53 fixed voice providers, including 
cable communications, wireline, and VoIP providers per county. Among 
these, an average of 12 fixed voice providers are facilities-based, and 
41 are non-facilities based resellers. We further estimate that there 
are an average of six facilities-based mobile wireless voice providers 
and 82 mobile virtual network operators per county. Consistent with the 
FNPRM, we estimate the overall recurring cost savings to providers 
arising from modifying DIRS to simplify filing to be approximately 
$143,000 annually. We arrive at this figure by reducing by 20%, on 
average, the time we estimate providers will spend filing DIRS reports 
and by eliminating the cost burden associated with the requirement to 
provide a DIRS final report. We estimate the cost saving from 
streamlining DIRS reporting with a (20% cost reduction) x 1 office and 
administrative support worker x ($35.22 hourly compensation) x [(10/60) 
hours for the initial entry + (10/60) hours for daily updates x 14 
days] x 339 counties x 18 facilities-based service providers = 
$107,456. DIRS filers will realize these cost savings on an annually 
recurring basis; therefore, these savings will exceed the one-time 
implementation costs associated with these changes. We further estimate 
a $35,819 cost saving from eliminating the final reporting requirement 
as 1 office and administrative support worker x ($35.22 hourly 
compensation) x (10/60) hours for the final report entry x 339 counties 
x 18 facilities-based service providers = $35,819. The aggregate cost 
saving is $143,275 (= $107,456 + $35,819), which we round to $143,000. 
For labor costs, the FNPRM used an hourly compensation figure of 
$35.22, which remains consistent with the most recent available wage 
data. The most recent available data suggests a base hourly wage for an 
office and administrative support worker of $24.12/hour. Consistent 
with the FNPRM, we calculate the applicable benefits markup by using 
Bureau of Labor Statistics data, as of December 2025, where civilian 
wages and salaries averaged $33.45/hour and benefits averaged $15.33/
hour. Using these figures, we calculate that benefits constituted a 
markup of $15.33/33.45 ~ 46%. Taking 46% for cost of benefits ($11.10/
hour), we determine an hourly compensation of $35.22/hour ($24.12/hour 
+ $11.10/hour). We acknowledge that a batch filer in DIRS may incur 
one-time costs ``to reconfigure its systems to reorganize how it 
exports data, and to ensure that the data is formatted in a manner 
accepted by DIRS'' and find those costs to be approximately $176,000. 
The most recent available data suggests a base hourly wage for a 
database administrator of $51.65/hour. Taking 46% for cost of benefits 
($23.76/hour), we arrive at an hourly compensation of $75.41/hour 
(which equals $51.65/hour plus $23.76/hour using our methodology for 
benefits markup). We revise our facilities-based estimate in the FNPRM, 
to estimate a total cost of $175,479 = 1 database administrator x 
$75.41/hour x 1 hour x 2,327 facilities-based cable, wireline, 
wireless, and interconnected VoIP providers, which we round to 
$176,000. Note that in the FNPRM, we used the county average estimate 
for facilities-based providers in counties where DIRS is activated, 
whereas the one-time cost here applies to all providers that have set 
up their systems for batch-filing. On our own initiative, we update the 
one-time cost calculation to reflect this. Because we do not have data 
on the total number of batch-filers, we conservatively use the sum of 
all facilities-based cable, wireline, wireless, and interconnected VoIP 
as a cost ceiling (i.e., the maximum possible number of batch filers). 
This consists of 53 wireless facilities based providers and 2,274 
wireline end-user switched access and interconnected VoIP providers 
based on the most recent Voice Telephone Services Report.
    Our action today to exclude non-facilities-based providers from 
mandatory DIRS reporting will result in considerable savings for these 
providers. We find there will be an estimated $3.9 million annual cost 
savings for these categories of providers, as explained in the FNPRM. 
We estimate the cost saving as follows: 1 office and administrative 
support worker working at a wage rate of $35.22 per hour working for 
ten minutes on the initial entry and ten minutes for each daily update 
multiplied by the 14-day average period of a DIRS activation plus the 
ten minutes saved as a result of no longer having to submit a final 
report multiplied by 339 counties in which DIRS is activated, on 
average, each year, multiplied by the sum of the nation's estimated 82 
mobile virtual network

[[Page 39525]]

operators and 41 resellers. The result of this calculation is 
$3,916,182, which we round to $3.9 million. No commenters opposed our 
estimated cost savings or methodology.
    Expanded reporting for public safety voice and broadband network 
operators will bring new visibility to the status of these critical 
networks and the essential first responders and emergency management 
customers who rely on those networks to perform life-saving recovery 
work. We estimate that the cost of public safety voice and broadband 
network operators reporting infrastructure status information in DIRS 
will not exceed approximately $72,000 annually. We update that 
calculation as follows: (1-20% cost saving) x {1 office and 
administrative support worker x ($35.22/hour) x [(10/60) hours for the 
initial entry + (10/60) hours for daily updates x 14 days] x 339 
counties x 3 public safety voice and broadband network operators{time}  
= $71,637, which we round to $72,000. As proposed, we calculate the 
annual costs for public safety voice and broadband network operators 
filing in DIRS by applying the hourly wage of an office and 
administrative support worker ($35.22) multiplied by the amount of time 
we estimate for these providers to enter initial contact information 
and file one daily status update in DIRS for each day of the 14-day 
average duration of a DIRS activation. We note that this figure is 
likely conservatively high because of our actions to eliminate 
duplicative reporting burdens, including allowing operators of public 
safety voice and broadband networks to satisfy their DIRS reporting 
obligation by indicating whether the status of their public safety 
voice and broadband network is the same as the status of their other 
network infrastructure.

Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

    As required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended 
(RFA), the Federal Communications Commission (Commission) incorporated 
an Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) in the Resilient 
Networks; Amendments to Part 4 of the Commission's Rules Concerning 
Disruptions to Communications Third Further Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking (Third Further Notice) released in August 2025. The 
Commission sought written public comment on the proposals in the Third 
Further Notice, including comment on the IRFA. No comments were filed 
addressing the IRFA. This Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) 
conforms to the RFA and it (or summaries thereof) will be published in 
the Federal Register.

A. Need for, and Objectives of, the Final Rules

    The Commission's rules require cable communications, wireless, 
wireline and interconnected VoIP providers to report network outages in 
the Commission's Disaster Information Reporting System (DIRS) when it 
is activated. Today's Third Report and Order reduces DIRS-related 
burdens faced by small and other service providers and government 
agencies so that they can dedicate more resources to restoring and 
maintaining communications services during a disaster. The Third Report 
and Order makes the following changes to DIRS: Redesigning the DIRS 
user interface to streamline reporting for service providers who enter 
information in DIRS manually so these filers can submit information 
more efficiently; Eliminating fields and reports that are not core to 
public safety disaster response and recovery needs to reduce the 
information collection burden for manual and batch DIRS filers; 
Eliminating DIRS final reports for mandated DIRS filers; and Exempting 
non-facilities-based providers from requirements to report in DIRS.
    The Third Report and Order also supports the collection of new 
information that would offer significant public safety value during 
disasters, namely requiring reporting on infrastructure status by 
public safety voice and broadband network operators, and allowing all 
DIRS filers to voluntarily submit granular location maps, such as maps 
of downed cell sites. The Commission believes that the improvements to 
DIRS in the Third Report and Order strike the appropriate balance of 
reducing regulatory burdens for providers while ensuring collection of 
necessary and relevant information when disasters occur.

B. Summary of Significant Issues Raised by Public Comments in Response 
to the IRFA

    Comments were filed by the Competitive Carriers Association (CCA), 
the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB), and WTA--Advocates for 
Rural Broadband (WTA) addressing the impact of the proposed rules on 
small entities. The Competitive Carriers Association (CCA) observes 
that redesigning the DIRS interface to replace the ten separate DIRS 
worksheets with a single, dynamic form addresses a concern that is 
``particularly acute for small and rural carriers. Such providers often 
operate with limited engineering and operations teams, many of whom are 
simultaneously engaged in damage assessment, power restoration, and 
physical repairs.'' WTA, whose members are small, rural local 
telecommunications carriers, also explain that ``[s]treamlining the 
DIRS reporting requirements is important to WTA's members, who do not 
have any ``surplus staff'' to deal with regulatory burdens, 
particularly when disasters strike.'' NAB discussed its support for a 
``one-click'' option in DIRS that would allow providers to indicate 
there is no change in infrastructure status from the previous day's 
report. NAB notes that in addition to saving time and streamlining DIRS 
report preparation, this change ``would facilitate broadcasters' 
voluntary participation in DIRS, especially smaller stations.'' The 
Commission agrees with these views and adopts both of these changes to 
DIRS.

C. Response to Comments by the Chief Counsel for the Small Business 
Administration Office of Advocacy

    Pursuant to the Small Business Jobs Act of 2010, which amended the 
RFA, the Commission is required to respond to any comments filed by the 
Chief Counsel for the Small Business Administration (SBA) Office of 
Advocacy, and to also provide a detailed statement of any change made 
to the proposed rules as a result of those comments. The Chief Counsel 
did not file any comments in response to the proposed rules in this 
proceeding.

D. Description and Estimate of the Number of Small Entities to Which 
the Rules Will Apply

    The RFA directs agencies to provide a description of and, where 
feasible, an estimate of the number of small entities that may be 
affected by the adopted rules. The RFA generally defines the term 
``small entity'' as having the same meaning as the terms ``small 
business,'' ``small organization,'' and ``small governmental 
jurisdiction.'' In addition, the term ``small business'' has the same 
meaning as the term ``small business concern'' under the Small Business 
Act (SBA). A ``small business concern'' is one which: (1) is 
independently owned and operated; (2) is not dominant in its field of 
operation; and (3) satisfies any additional criteria established by the 
SBA. The SBA establishes small business size standards that agencies 
are required to use when promulgating regulations relating to small 
businesses; agencies may establish alternative size standards for use 
in such programs, but must consult and obtain approval from SBA before 
doing so.
    Our actions, over time, may affect small entities that are not 
easily categorized at present. We therefore

[[Page 39526]]

describe three broad groups of small entities that could be directly 
affected by our actions. In general, a small business is an independent 
business having fewer than 500 employees. These types of small 
businesses represent 99.9% of all businesses in the United States, 
which translates to 34.75 million businesses. Next, ``small 
organizations'' are not-for-profit enterprises that are independently 
owned and operated and not dominant their field. While we do not have 
data regarding the number of non-profits that meet that criteria, over 
99 percent of nonprofits have fewer than 500 employees. Finally, 
``small governmental jurisdictions'' are defined as cities, counties, 
towns, townships, villages, school districts, or special districts with 
populations of less than fifty thousand. Based on the 2022 U.S. Census 
of Governments data, we estimate that at least 48,724 out of 90,835 
local government jurisdictions have a population of less than 50,000.
    The rules adopted in the Third Report and Order will apply to small 
entities in the industries identified in the chart below by their six-
digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes and 
corresponding SBA size standard. Where available, we also provide 
additional information regarding the number of potentially affected 
entities in the identified industries below.

                               Table 1--2022 U.S. Census Bureau Data by NAICS Code
         [Footnotes specify potentially affected entities within a regulated industry where applicable]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                              Total
            Regulated industry               NAICS        SBA size standard        Total      small     % Small
                                              code                                 firms      firms      firms
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Radio Broadcasting Stations..............     516110  $47 million..............      2,616      2,136     81.65%
Television Broadcasting Stations.........     516120  $47 million..............        413        316      76.51
Media Streaming Distribution Services,        516210  $47 million..............      5,217      3,673      70.40
 Social Networks, and Other Media
 Networks and Content Providers.
Wired Telecommunications Carriers........     517111  1,500 employees..........      3,403      3,027      88.95
Wireless Telecommunications Carriers          517112  1,500 employees..........      1,184      1,081      91.30
 (except Satellite).
Telecommunications Resellers.............     517121  1,500 employees..........        955        847      88.69
Satellite Telecommunications.............     517410  $44 million..............        332        195      58.73
All Other Telecommunications.............     517810  $40 million..............      1,673      1,007      60.19
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Table 2--Telecommunications Service Provider Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2024 Universal service monitoring report telecommunications          SBA size standard (1,500 employees)
      service provider data (data as of December 2023)      ----------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------   Total number FCC                       % Small
                      Affected entity                          Form 499A filers     Small firms      entities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Competitive Local Exchange Carriers (CLECs)................                3,729           3,576           95.90
Incumbent Local Exchange Carriers (Incumbent LECs).........                1,175             917           78.04
Interexchange Carriers (IXCs)..............................                  113              95           84.07
Local Exchange Carriers (LECs).............................                4,904           4,493           91.62
Local Resellers............................................                  222             217           97.75
Telecommunications Resellers...............................                  633             615           97.16
Toll Resellers.............................................                  411             398           96.84
Wired Telecommunications Carriers..........................                4,682           4,276           91.33
Wireless Telecommunications Carriers (except Satellite)....                  585             498           85.13
Wireless Telephony.........................................                  326             247           75.77
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                         Table 3--Broadcast Entity Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Broadcast station owners   (as of August 8, 2025)                 SBA size standard ($47 million)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Number
                         Affected entity                            commercial      Small firms       % Small
                                                                     licensed                        entities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Radio Stations (AM & FM) Groups.................................           2,881           2,863           99.38
Television Stations.............................................             171             142           83.04
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                          Table 4--Cable Entities Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       % Small
              Cable entities                        Size standard          Total firms  Small firms    firms in
                                                                                                       industry
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cable System Operators (Telecom Act         Serves fewer than 498,000              530          524        98.87
 Standard) Small Cable Operator.             subscribers, either directly
                                             or through affiliates.
Cable Companies and Systems (Rate           Serves 400,000 or fewer                530          523        98.51
 Regulation) Small Cable Company.            subscribers nationwide.

[[Page 39527]]

 
Cable Companies and Systems (Rate           Serves 15,000 or fewer               4,545        3,965        87.24
 Regulation) Small Cable System (headends).  subscribers.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

E. Description of Economic Impact and Projected Reporting, 
Recordkeeping, and Other Compliance Requirements for Small Entities

    The RFA directs agencies to describe the economic impact of adopted 
rules on small entities, as well as projected reporting, recordkeeping 
and other compliance requirements, including an estimate of the classes 
of small entities which will be subject to the requirement and the type 
of professional skills necessary for preparation of the report or 
record.
    The Commission estimates that the reduction the burdens of DIRS 
reporting on small and other communications service providers, will 
result in annual recurring cost savings for small entities. By removing 
the need for providers to select from the current array of ten separate 
forms concerning different types of service and infrastructure, the 
Commission expects that manual filers should be able to complete their 
filings more quickly. In addition, the Commission expects that 
eliminating unnecessary and duplicative fields will also allow DIRS 
filings to be submitted more quickly. The Commission estimates the 
overall recurring cost savings to small providers arising from 
modifying DIRS to simplify the filing process to annually be 
approximately $23.48 for each county in which a small provider 
operates. The Commission arrives at this figure by reducing by 20%, on 
average, the time we estimate that small and other providers will spend 
filing DIRS reports and by eliminating the cost burden associated with 
the requirement to provide a DIRS final report. The Commission 
acknowledges that a batch filer in DIRS may incur one-time costs ``to 
reconfigure its systems to reorganize how it exports data, and to 
ensure that the data is formatted in a manner accepted by DIRS'' and 
find those costs to be $75.41 per small entity.
    In addition, the exclusion of small and other non-facilities-based 
providers from mandatory DIRS reporting will result in an estimated 
$3.9 million annual cost savings. The Commission estimates the cost 
saving as follows: one office and administrative support worker working 
at a wage rate of $35.22 per hour, working for ten minutes on the 
initial entry and ten minutes for each daily update, multiplied by the 
14-day average period of a DIRS activation. Added to this is the ten 
minutes saved due to no longer having to submit a final report. This 
total is then multiplied by the 339 counties in which DIRS is 
activated, on average, each year, and further multiplied by the sum of 
the nation's estimated 82 mobile virtual network operators and 41 
resellers. The result of this calculation is an annual cost savings of 
$93.92 for each county in which a small MVNO or small reseller 
operates.
    Expanded reporting for public safety voice and broadband network 
operators will bring new visibility to the status of these critical 
networks and the essential first responders and emergency management 
customers who rely on those networks to perform life-saving recovery 
work. The Commission estimates that small entities will not be impacted 
by the public safety voice and broadband network operators reporting 
infrastructure status information in DIRS requirement since the 
providers it would likely apply to are not considered small entities.

F. Discussion of Steps Taken To Minimize the Significant Economic 
Impact on Small Entities, and Significant Alternatives Considered

    The RFA requires an agency to provide ``a description of the steps 
the agency has taken to minimize the significant economic impact on 
small entities . . . including a statement of the factual, policy, and 
legal reasons for selecting the alternative adopted in the final rule 
and why each one of the other significant alternatives to the rule 
considered by the agency which affect the impact on small entities was 
rejected.''
    In the Third Report and Order, the Commission takes several steps 
that could reduce the economic impact for small entities. As noted 
above, our actions reduce DIRS-related burdens faced by small and other 
service providers and government agencies so that they can dedicate 
more resources to restoring and maintaining communications services 
during a disaster. These burden-reducing actions include streamlining 
the DIRS user interface eliminating unnecessary fields; eliminating 
DIRS final reports for mandated DIRS filers; and exempting non-
facilities-based providers from requirements to report in DIRS. The 
Commission also considered additional ways to reduce burdens on DIRS 
filers that were proposed by commenters and adopted some of those 
proposals. In some instances, the Commission declines to make changes 
to DIRS on which it sought comment that had the potential to further 
reduce burdens, such as eliminating the voluntarily DIRS satellite 
form, because the potential public safety value of collecting the 
information outweighed the potential reduction in costs.
    The Commission declines to adopt its proposal to require 
facilities-based wireless providers to identify which non-facilities-
based provides utilize their networks within the DIRS activation area, 
nor does the Commission adopt the alternative that mobile virtual 
network operators identify their underlying network providers. The 
Commission is persuaded by the record that a list of business 
relationships alone would be insufficient to enable emergency managers 
to derive actionable insights about a disaster's impacts on their 
community, and therefore requiring the reporting of this information 
would be unnecessarily burdensome on small and other providers.
    The Commission adopts new requirements for public safety voice and 
broadband network operates to report in DIRS in light of the vital role 
these services play in keeping first responders connected during 
emergency response and the need to provide visibility and situational 
awareness into these vital public-safety networks during disasters 
while only imposing costs on a small number of operators. The 
Commission considers whether direct reporting to enterprise customers 
via interfaces such as FirstNet Central would be an adequate substitute 
for DIRS reporting, but finds that that approach would not yield 
information that was comprehensive to accomplish these public safety 
goals.
    The Commission also declines to extend the suspension of NORS 
reporting requirements during DIRS

[[Page 39528]]

activations to DIRS-Lite activations to preserve visibility into 
outages during those activations. While this suspension would reduce 
filing burdens on small and other providers, the Commission finds that 
this would receive far less specific information that it currently 
receives about outages for a much smaller number of providers, which 
would create a gap in its situational awareness about network 
reliability and result in an incomplete picture of the weak points in 
critical communications infrastructure. The Commission also finds that 
this would pose significant administrative burdens that outweigh the 
benefits of suspending the requirement. The Commission is also not 
persuaded that DIRS-Lite activations present burdens to providers that 
would meaningfully detract from their service restoration efforts.

Ordering Clauses

    Accordingly, it is ordered that the Third Report and Order in PS 
Docket Nos. 21-346 and 15-80 and ET Docket No. 04-35 is adopted.
    It is further ordered that the Office of Managing Director, 
Performance Program Management, shall send a copy of this Third Report 
and Order in a report to be sent to Congress and the Government 
Accountability Office pursuant to the Congressional Review Act, 5 
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).
    It is further ordered that this Third Report and Order shall be 
effective upon publication in the Federal Register.

List of Subjects in 47 CFR Part 4

    Airports, Communications common carriers, Communications equipment, 
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Telecommunications.

Federal Communications Commission.
Aleta Bowers,
Federal Register Liaison Officer, Office of the Secretary.

Final Rules

    For the reasons discussed in the preamble, the Federal 
Communications Commission amends 47 CFR part 4 as follows:

PART 4--DISRUPTIONS TO COMMUNICATIONS

0
1. The authority citation for part 4 is revised to read as follows:

    Authority: 47 U.S.C. 34-39, 151, 154, 155, 157, 201, 214, 218, 
251, 301, 303, 307, 309, 316, 332, 403, 615, 615a-1, 615b, 1302(a), 
1302(b), 1421, 1426, and 1433; 5 U.S.C. 301; and E.O. 10530, 19 FR 
2709, 3 CFR, 1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

0
2. Amend Sec.  4.18 by:
0
a. Revising the section heading and paragraph (a) introductory text; 
and
0
b. Removing and reserving paragraph (a)(2).
    The revisions read as follows:

Sec.  4.18   Mandatory Disaster Information Reporting System (DIRS) 
reporting.

    (a) Cable Communications, Wireline, Wireless, and Interconnected 
VoIP providers that own or operate their own facilities shall be 
required to report their infrastructure status information each day in 
the Disaster Information Reporting System (DIRS) when the Commission 
activates DIRS in geographic areas in which they provide service, even 
when their reportable infrastructure has not changed compared to the 
prior day. These providers are subject to mandated reporting in DIRS 
and shall:
* * * * *

0
3. Delayed indefinitely, further amend Sec.  4.18 by revising paragraph 
(a) and adding paragraph (c) to read as follows:

Sec.  4.18  Mandatory Disaster Information Reporting System (DIRS) 
reporting.

    (a) Cable communications, wireline communications, wireless 
service, and interconnected VoIP providers that own or operate their 
own facilities shall submit daily reports on their infrastructure 
status in the Disaster Information Reporting System (DIRS) when the 
Commission activates DIRS in geographic areas in which they provide 
service, even when their reportable infrastructure has not changed 
compared to the prior day. These providers shall include in their 
reports the following information about areas in which the Commission 
has activated DIRS:
    (1) Cable communications providers shall submit information 
concerning the type, power status, location, and identifying 
information of any major equipment that is down.
    (2) Wireline communications providers shall submit information 
concerning the type, power status, location, and identifying 
information of any major equipment that is down; the quantity of 
working telephone numbers for which the provider provides service, and 
the quantity of such numbers that are without service; the name, 
service area, and number of customers served by any Public Safety 
Answering Point (PSAPs) for which the provider provides service; the 
number of Optical Carrier 3 (OC3) circuits or their equivalents that 
are down; and the location, identifying information, and quantity of 
working numbers served by any remote aggregation device, and the 
quantity of such numbers that are without service.
    (3) Wireless service providers shall submit information concerning 
the type, power status, location, and identifying information of any 
major equipment that is down; the number and location of cell sites 
that are down or on backup power; and the cause of any cell site 
outages.
    (4) Interconnected VoIP providers shall submit information 
concerning the type, power status, location, and identifying 
information of any major equipment that is down; the number of 
interconnected VoIP service subscribers without service; and the number 
of OC3 circuits or their equivalents that are down.
    (5) Cable communications, wireline communications, and 
interconnected VoIP providers that are stage 2 recipients of the 
Uniendo a Puerto Rico Fund and Connect USVI Fund shall also submit 
information concerning the quantity of broadband internet access 
service subscribers for whom the provider provides service, and the 
quantity of such subscribers who are without service.
* * * * *
    (c) Public safety voice and broadband network operators shall 
submit information in DIRS concerning the status of infrastructure used 
by that network. They shall submit information that is applicable to 
the characteristics of the network (e.g., the provider of a wireless 
public safety voice and broadband network shall complete the wireless 
service provider fields in DIRS). Facilities-based cable 
communications, wireline communications, wireless service, and 
interconnected VoIP providers that operate public safety voice and 
broadband networks shall identify the status of the infrastructure 
relied upon by the public safety voice and broadband network in 
addition to identifying the status of their infrastructure overall.

[FR Doc. 2026-13155 Filed 6-29-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6712-01-P