[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 124 (Tuesday, June 30, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 39501-39506]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-13180]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

40 CFR Part 180

[EPA-HQ-OPP-2021-0435; FRL-12795-01-OCSPP]

Diflufenican; Pesticide Tolerances

AGENCY: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: This regulation establishes tolerances for residues of 
diflufenican (CASRN 83164-33-4) in or on multiple commodities which are 
identified and discussed later in this document. Under the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), Bayer CropScience submitted a 
petition to EPA requesting that EPA establish a maximum permissible 
level for residues of this pesticide in or on the identified 
commodities.

DATES: This rule is effective on June 30, 2026. Objections and requests 
for hearings must be received on or before August 31, 2026 and must be 
filed in accordance with the instructions provided in 40 CFR part 178 
(see also Unit I.D. of this document.)

ADDRESSES: The docket for this action, identified by docket 
identification (ID) number EPA-HQ-OPP-2021-0435, is available online at 
 https://www.regulations.gov . Additional information about dockets 
generally, along with instructions for visiting the docket in person, 
is available at  https://www.epa.gov/dockets .

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Charles Smith, Registration Division 
(7505T) Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental Protection Agency, 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20460-0001; main telephone 
number: (202) 566-1030; email address:   [email&#160;protected]  .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. General Information

A. Does this action apply to me?

    You may be potentially affected by this action if you are an 
agricultural producer, food manufacturer, or pesticide manufacturer. 
The following list of North American Industrial Classification System 
(NAICS) codes is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather provides a 
guide to help readers determine whether this document applies to them. 
Potentially affected entities may include:
      Crop production (NAICS code 111).
      Animal production (NAICS code 112).

[[Page 39502]]

      Food manufacturing (NAICS code 311).
      Pesticide manufacturing (NAICS code 32532).
    If you have any questions regarding the applicability of this 
action to a particular entity, consult the person listed under FOR 
FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT.

B. What is EPA's authority for taking this action?

    EPA is issuing this rulemaking under section 408 of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), 21 U.S.C. 346a. FFDCA section 
408(b)(2)(A)(i) allows EPA to establish a tolerance (the legal limit 
for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food) only if EPA 
determines that the tolerance is ``safe.'' FFDCA section 
408(b)(2)(A)(ii) defines ``safe'' to mean that ``there is a reasonable 
certainty that no harm will result from aggregate exposure to the 
pesticide chemical residue, including all anticipated dietary exposures 
and all other exposures for which there is reliable information.'' This 
includes exposure through drinking water and in residential settings 
but does not include occupational exposure. FFDCA section 408(b)(2)(C) 
requires EPA to give special consideration to exposure of infants and 
children to the pesticide chemical residue in establishing a tolerance 
and to ``ensure that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will 
result to infants and children from aggregate exposure to the pesticide 
chemical residue. . .''

C. How can I file an objection or hearing request?

    Under FFDCA section 408(g), 21 U.S.C. 346a(g), any person may file 
an objection to any aspect of this regulation and may also request a 
hearing on those objections. If you fail to file an objection to the 
final rule within the time period specified in the final rule, you will 
have waived the right to raise any issues resolved in the final rule. 
You must file your objection or request a hearing on this regulation in 
accordance with the instructions provided in 40 CFR part 178. To ensure 
proper receipt by EPA, you must identify the docket ID number EPA-HQ-
OPP-2021-0435 in the subject line on the first page of your submission. 
All objections and requests for a hearing must be in writing and must 
be received by the Hearing Clerk on or before August 31, 2026.
    The EPA's Office of Administrative Law Judges (OALJ), in which the 
Hearing Clerk is housed, urges parties to file and serve documents by 
electronic means only, notwithstanding any other particular 
requirements set forth in other procedural rules governing those 
proceedings. See ``Revised Order Urging Electronic Filing and 
Service,'' dated June 22, 2023, which can be found at  https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-06/2023-06-22%20-%20revised%20order%20urging%20electronic%20filing%20and%20service.pdf . 
Although the EPA's regulations require submission via U.S. Mail or hand 
delivery, the EPA intends to treat submissions filed via electronic 
means as properly filed submissions; therefore, the EPA believes the 
preference for submission via electronic means will not be prejudicial. 
When submitting documents to the OALJ electronically, a person should 
utilize the OALJ e-filing system at  https://yosemite.epa.gov/oa/eab/eab-alj_upload.nsf .
    In addition to filing an objection or hearing request with the 
Hearing Clerk as described in 40 CFR part 178, please submit a copy of 
the filing (excluding any Confidential Business Information (CBI)) for 
inclusion in the public docket at  https://www.regulations.gov . Follow 
the online instructions for submitting comments. Do not submit 
electronically any information you consider to be CBI or other 
information whose disclosure is restricted by statute. If you wish to 
include CBI in your request, please follow the applicable instructions 
at  https://www.epa.gov/dockets/commenting-epa-dockets#rules  and clearly 
mark the information that you claim to be CBI. Information not marked 
confidential pursuant to 40 CFR part 2 may be disclosed publicly by EPA 
without prior notice.

II. Petitioned-For Tolerance

    In the Federal Register of August 24, 2021 (86 FR 47275, FRL-8792-
02-OCSPP), EPA issued a document pursuant to FFDCA section 408(d)(3), 
21 U.S.C. 346a(d)(3), announcing the filing of a pesticide petition (PP 
1F8912) by Bayer CropScience, 800 N. Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis, MO 
63167. The petition requested that 40 CFR part 180 be amended by 
establishing tolerances for residues of the herbicide diflufenican, N-
(2,4-difluorophenyl)-2-[3-(trifluoromethyl)phenoxy]-3-
pyridinecarboxamide, in or on corn, forage at 0.01 parts per million 
(ppm); corn, grain at 0.01 ppm; corn, stover at 0.01 ppm; soybean, 
forage at 0.015 ppm; soybean, hay at 0.02 ppm; soybean, seed at 0.01 
ppm. That document referenced a summary of the petition prepared by 
Bayer CropScience, the registrant, which is available in the docket, 
 https://www.regulations.gov . Three comments were received on the notice 
of filing. EPA's response to these comments is discussed in Unit IV.C.
    The tolerances EPA is establishing vary from what the petitioners 
have requested, these changes are explained in greater detail in Unit 
IV.D.

III. Final Tolerance Action

A. Aggregate Risk Assessment and Determination of Safety

    Consistent with FFDCA section 408(b)(2)(D), and the factors 
specified therein, EPA has reviewed the available scientific data and 
other relevant information in support of this action. EPA has 
sufficient data to assess the hazards of and to make a determination on 
aggregate exposure for diflufenican including exposure resulting from 
the tolerances established by this action. EPA's assessment of 
exposures and risks associated with diflufenican is as follows.

B. Toxicological Profile

    EPA has evaluated the available toxicity data and considered its 
validity, completeness, and reliability as well as the relationship of 
the results of the studies to human risk. EPA has also considered 
available information concerning the variability of the sensitivities 
of major identifiable subgroups of consumers, including infants and 
children.
    The hazard database for diflufenican indicates that the major 
toxicological effect in rodents is decreased body weight regardless of 
duration of exposure, and no clear target organ was identified. No 
dermal or inhalation toxicity data are available and therefore every 
effect specified is through the oral route. In the subchronic and 
chronic oral studies, decreased body weights were seen in both rats and 
mice, and adverse decreases in body weight occurred at doses lower than 
those causing additional toxicological effects. The rat appeared to be 
the most sensitive species tested, followed by the mouse. There were no 
adverse effects seen in the subchronic or chronic dog studies up to the 
limit dose of 1000 mg/kg/day. There did not appear to be a difference 
in toxicity by sex in any species.
    No evidence of increased quantitative or qualitative lifestage 
susceptibility was seen in rat or rabbit developmental toxicity studies 
or in the rat reproduction studies. There were no adverse maternal or 
developmental effects in the developmental rat or rabbit studies up to 
and exceeding the limit dose (>=1000 mg/kg/day). In the rat extended 
one-generation and two-generation reproduction studies,

[[Page 39503]]

adverse decreases in body weights in the parental animals and offspring 
were the most sensitive effect. Decreased body weights in the offspring 
were observed in the presence of decreased parental body weights, and 
there were no reproductive effects seen. There was low acute toxicity 
through oral, dermal, and inhalation routes. Diflufenican is not an 
ocular or dermal irritant, nor is it a dermal sensitizer.
    Diflufenican is classified as ``Not Likely to be Carcinogenic to 
Humans.'' No treatment-related increase in the incidence of tumors was 
observed in carcinogenicity studies in rats or mice at doses that were 
considered to be adequate. Additionally, there is no evidence of 
mutagenicity in vivo or in vitro. One of the plant metabolites of 
diflufenican (2,4-difluoroaniline malonate, hereafter referred to as 
BCS-BT38895) was found to be more toxic than the parent compound, with 
a different toxicological profile. A cursory analysis of the metabolite 
based on highly conservative assumptions is assessed separately in 
Appendix C (pages 96-99) of the Human Health Risk Assessment, in docket 
ID number EPA-HQ-OPP-2021-0435.
    Specific information on the studies received and the nature of the 
adverse effects caused by diflufenican as well as the no-observed-
adverse-effect-level (NOAEL) and the lowest-observed-adverse-effect-
level (LOAEL) from the toxicity studies can be found at  https://www.regulations.gov  in document ``Diflufenican. Human Health Risk 
Assessment for Diflufenican. New Active Ingredient'' at pages 16-25 in 
docket ID number EPA-HQ-OPP-2021-0435.

C. Toxicological Points of Departure/Levels of Concern

    Once a pesticide's toxicological profile is determined, EPA 
identifies toxicological points of departure (POD) and levels of 
concern to use in evaluating the risk posed by human exposure to the 
pesticide. For hazards that have a threshold below which there is no 
appreciable risk, the toxicological POD is used as the basis for 
derivation of reference values for risk assessment. PODs are developed 
based on a careful analysis of the doses in each toxicological study to 
determine the dose at which no adverse effects are observed (the NOAEL) 
and the lowest dose at which adverse effects of concern are identified 
(the LOAEL). Uncertainty/safety factors are used in conjunction with 
the POD to calculate a safe exposure level--generally referred to as a 
population-adjusted dose (PAD) or a reference dose (RfD)--and a safe 
margin of exposure (MOE). For non-threshold risks, the Agency assumes 
that any amount of exposure will lead to some degree of risk. Thus, the 
Agency estimates risk in terms of the probability of an occurrence of 
the adverse effect expected in a lifetime. For more information on the 
general principles EPA uses in risk characterization and a complete 
description of the risk assessment process, see  https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/assessing-human-health-risk-pesticides .
    For more detailed information on the toxicological endpoints for 
diflufenican used for human risk assessment can be found in the 
``Diflufenican. Human Health Risk Assessment for Diflufenican. New 
Active Ingredient'' at pages 22-23 in docket ID number EPA-HQ-OPP-2021-
0435.

D. Exposure Assessment

    1. Dietary exposure from food and feed uses. In evaluating dietary 
exposure to diflufenican, EPA considered exposure under the petitioned-
for tolerances. EPA assessed dietary exposures from diflufenican in 
food as follows:
    i. Acute exposure. Quantitative acute dietary exposure and risk 
assessments are performed for a food-use pesticide if a toxicological 
study has indicated the possibility of an effect of concern occurring 
as a result of a 1-day or single exposure. No such effects were 
identified in the toxicological studies for diflufenican; therefore, a 
quantitative acute dietary exposure assessment is unnecessary.
    ii. Chronic exposure. In conducting the chronic dietary exposure 
assessment, EPA used the 2005-2010 food consumption data from the 
United States Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey, What We Eat in America, (NHANES/WWEIA). 
As to residue levels in food, EPA conducted an unrefined chronic 
dietary exposure risk assessment using 100 percent crop treated (PCT) 
and combined residues of diflufenican and DFF-amide ( https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/models-pesticide-risk-assessment .
    EPA calculated the estimated drinking water concentrations (EDWCs) 
of diflufenican Using the Pesticide Water Calculator (PWC) ver. 2.001. 
The modeling simulations for maximum label rates indicate that 
concentrations in ground water are expected to be higher than those in 
surface water. Therefore, the chronic value of 30.1 ppb was used to 
assess the dietary contribution from drinking water.
    3. From non-dietary exposure. The term ``residential exposure'' is 
used in this document to refer to non-occupational, non-dietary 
exposure (e.g., products registered for direct application to lawns and 
for garden pest control, indoor pest control, termiticides, and flea 
and tick control on pets). Diflufenican is not proposed for any 
specific use patterns that would result in direct applications in 
residential areas.
    4. Cumulative effects from substances with a common mechanism of 
toxicity. Section 408(b)(2)(D)(v) of FFDCA requires that, when 
considering whether to establish, modify, or revoke a tolerance, the 
Agency consider ``available information'' concerning the cumulative 
effects of a particular pesticide's residues and ``other substances 
that have a common mechanism of toxicity.''
    EPA has not found diflufenican to share a common mechanism of 
toxicity with any other substances, and diflufenican does not appear to 
produce a toxic metabolite produced by other substances. For the 
purposes of this tolerance action, therefore, EPA has assumed that 
diflufenican does not have a common mechanism of toxicity with

[[Page 39504]]

other substances. For information regarding EPA's efforts to determine 
which chemicals have a common mechanism of toxicity and to evaluate the 
cumulative effects of such chemicals, see EPA's website at  https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/pesticide-cumulative-risk-assessment-framework .

D. Safety Factor for Infants and Children

    1. In general. Section 408(b)(2)(C) of FFDCA provides that EPA 
shall apply an additional tenfold (10X) margin of safety for infants 
and children in the case of threshold effects to account for prenatal 
and postnatal toxicity and the completeness of the database on toxicity 
and exposure unless EPA determines based on reliable data that a 
different margin of safety will be safe for infants and children. This 
additional margin of safety is commonly referred to as the FQPA Safety 
Factor (SF). In applying this provision, EPA either retains the default 
value of 10X, or uses a different additional safety factor when 
reliable data available to EPA support the choice of a different 
factor.
    2. Prenatal and postnatal sensitivity. No evidence of increased 
quantitative or qualitative lifestage susceptibility was seen in rat or 
rabbit developmental toxicity studies or in the rat reproduction 
studies.
    3. Conclusion. EPA has determined that reliable data show the 
safety of infants and children would be adequately protected if the 
FQPA SF were reduced to 1X. That decision is based on the following 
findings:
    i. The toxicity database for diflufenican is complete.
    ii. There is no indication that diflufenican is a neurotoxic 
chemical, and there is no need for a developmental neurotoxicity study 
or additional UFs to account for neurotoxicity.
    iii. There is no evidence that diflufenican results in increased 
quantitative or qualitative lifestage susceptibility in rat and rabbit 
developmental studies or in the rat reproduction toxicity studies. 
There were no maternal or developmental adverse effects observed in any 
of the developmental studies. In the reproduction toxicity studies, no 
reproductive effects were observed; however, decreased body weights 
were observed in the offspring and maternal animals at comparable dose 
levels.
    iv. There are no residual uncertainties identified in the exposure 
databases.

E. Aggregate Risks and Determination of Safety

    EPA determines whether acute and chronic dietary pesticide 
exposures are safe by comparing aggregate exposure estimates to the 
acute PAD (aPAD) and chronic PAD (cPAD). For linear cancer risks, EPA 
calculates the lifetime probability of acquiring cancer given the 
estimated aggregate exposure. Short, intermediate, and chronic-term 
risks are evaluated by comparing the estimated aggregate food, water, 
and residential exposure to the appropriate points of departure (POD) 
to ensure that an adequate margin of exposure (MOE) exists.
    1. Acute risk. An acute aggregate risk assessment takes into 
account acute exposure estimates from dietary consumption of food and 
drinking water. No adverse effect resulting from a single oral exposure 
was identified and no acute dietary endpoint was selected. Therefore, 
diflufenican is not expected to pose an acute risk.
    2. Chronic risk. Using the exposure assumptions described in this 
unit for chronic exposure, EPA has concluded that chronic exposure to 
diflufenican from food and water will utilize  - \8\, which is below the Agency's level of concern. 
Based again on diflufenican' s limited use patterns and lower 
tolerance-level residues, the Agency concludes that the cancer risk 
estimates for BCS-BT38895 residues indicate that there should not be 
any cancer risk from diflufenican-derived BCS-BT38895 residues.
    7. Determination of safety. Based on these risk assessments, EPA 
concludes that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result 
to the general population, or to infants and children, from aggregate 
exposure to diflufenican residues.

IV. Other Considerations

A. Analytical Enforcement Methodology

    Adequate enforcement methodology high-performance liquid 
chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS), Method No. 
DC-003-P18-02 is available to enforce the tolerance expression.
    The method may be requested from: Chief, Analytical Chemistry 
Branch, Environmental Science Center, 701 Mapes Rd., Ft. Meade, MD 
20755-5350; telephone number: (410) 305-2905; email address: 
  [email&#160;protected]  .

[[Page 39505]]

B. International Residue Limits

    In making its tolerance decisions, EPA seeks to harmonize U.S. 
tolerances with international standards whenever possible, consistent 
with U.S. food safety standards and agricultural practices. EPA 
considers the international maximum residue limits (MRLs) established 
by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (Codex), as required by FFDCA 
section 408(b)(4). The Codex Alimentarius is a joint United Nations 
Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization food 
standards program, and it is recognized as an international food safety 
standards-setting organization in trade agreements to which the United 
States is a party. EPA may establish a tolerance that is different from 
a Codex MRL; however, FFDCA section 408(b)(4) requires that EPA explain 
the reasons for departing from the Codex level. The Codex has not 
established a MRL for diflufenican. However, the proposed tolerances 
are harmonized with the currently established MRLs of diflufenican in 
the European Union.

C. Response to Comments

    In the Federal Register of August 24, 2021 (86 FR 47275, FRL-8792-
02-OCSPP), EPA issued a document pursuant to FFDCA section 408(d)(3), 
21 U.S.C. 346a(d)(3), announcing the filing of a pesticide petition (PP 
1F8912) by Bayer CropScience, 800 N. Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis, MO 
63167. The Agency received three comments. Two of the comments (EPA-HQ-
OPP-2021-0435-0004 and EPA-HQ-OPP-2021-0435-0005) were by the same 
private citizen raising concerns over the use of pesticides on corn and 
soybeans. Although the Agency recognizes that some individuals believe 
that pesticides should be banned on agricultural crops, the existing 
legal framework provided by section 408 of the FFDCA authorizes EPA to 
establish tolerances when it determines that the tolerance is safe. 
Upon consideration of the validity, completeness, and reliability of 
the available data as well as other factors the FFDCA requires EPA to 
consider, EPA has determined that these diflufenican tolerances are 
safe. The same commenter further claims diflufenican contains fluoride 
and states fluoride to be toxic to insects, but provided no information 
supporting a conclusion that diflufenican is not safe, nor did the 
commenter provide any basis for concluding that tolerances would have a 
disproportionate effect on any population. A comprehensive database is 
available for diflufenican to support risk assessments that are 
protective of human health and the environment (including insects). The 
third comment (EPA-HQ-OPP-2021-0435-0006) was also from a private 
citizen which did not pertain to diflufenican. The comment addressed 
the Federal Aviation Administration proposed rule (FAA-2021-0793) which 
is not germane to this action.

D. Revisions to Petitioned-For Tolerances

    FFDCA section 408(d)(4)(A)(i) permits the Agency to finalize a 
tolerance that varies from that sought by the petition. The petitioner 
initially requested tolerance levels of 0.015 ppm for soybean, forage 
and 0.02 ppm for soybean, hay. However, the Agency deems it appropriate 
to use the more conservative (i.e., results with the highest residue 
value) approach and as a result produced a recommended tolerance levels 
of 0.01 ppm for soybean, forage and 0.015 ppm for soybean, hay when 
entered into the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) calculator.

V. Conclusion

    Therefore, tolerances are established for residues of diflufenican, 
N-(2,4-difluorophenyl)-2-[3-(trifluoromethyl)phenoxy]-3-
pyridinecarboxamide, in or on corn, field, forage at 0.01 ppm; corn, 
field, grain at 0.01 ppm; corn, field, stover at 0.01 ppm; soybean, 
forage at 0.01 ppm; soybean, hay at 0.015 ppm; and soybean, seed at 
0.01 ppm.

VI. Statutory and Executive Order Reviews

    Additional information about these statutes and Executive Orders 
can be found at  https://www.epa.gov/regulations/and-executive-orders .

A. Executive Order 12866: Regulatory Planning and Review

    This action is exempt from review under Executive Order 12866 (58 
FR 51735, October 4, 1993), because it establishes or modifies a 
pesticide tolerance or a tolerance exemption under FFDCA section 408 in 
response to a petition submitted to the Agency. The Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) has exempted these types of actions from 
review under Executive Order 12866.

B. Executive Order 14192: Unleashing Prosperity Through Deregulation

    Executive Order 14192 (90 FR 9065, February 6, 2025) does not apply 
because actions that establish a tolerance under FFDCA section 408 are 
exempted from review under Executive Order 12866.

C. Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA)

    This action does not impose an information collection burden under 
the PRA 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq., because it does not contain any 
information collection activities.

D. Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)

    Since tolerance actions that are established on the basis of a 
petition under FFDCA section 408(d), such as the tolerance in this 
final rule, do not require the issuance of a proposed rule, the 
requirements of the RFA, 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., do not apply to this 
action.

E. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (UMRA)

    This action does not contain an unfunded mandate of $100 million or 
more (in 1995 dollars and adjusted annually for inflation) as described 
in UMRA, 2 U.S.C. 1531-1538, and does not significantly or uniquely 
affect small governments. The action imposes no enforceable duty on any 
State, local, or Tribal governments or on the private sector.

F. Executive Order 13132: Federalism

    This action does not have federalism implications as specified in 
Executive Order 13132 (64 FR 43255, August 10, 1999), because it will 
not have substantial direct effects on the states, on the relationship 
between the National Government and the States, or on the distribution 
of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government.

G. Executive Order 13175: Consultation and Coordination With Indian 
Tribal Governments

    This action does not have Tribal implications as specified in 
Executive Order 13175 (65 FR 67249, November 9, 2000), because it will 
not have substantial direct effects on Tribal governments, on the 
relationship between the Federal Government and the Indian Tribes, or 
on the distribution of power and responsibilities between the Federal 
Government and Indian Tribes.

H. Executive Order 13045: Protection of Children From Environmental 
Health Risks and Safety Risks

    This action is not subject to Executive Order 13045 (62 FR 19885, 
April 23, 1997) because tolerance actions like this one are exempt from 
review under Executive Order 12866. However, EPA's 2021 Policy on 
Children's Health applies to this action.

[[Page 39506]]

    This rule finalizes tolerance actions under the FFDCA, which 
requires EPA to give special consideration to exposure of infants and 
children to the pesticide chemical residue in establishing a tolerance 
and to ``ensure that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will 
result to infants and children from aggregate exposure to the pesticide 
chemical residue . . .'' (FFDCA 408(b)(2)(C)). The Agency's 
consideration is documented in the pesticide-specific registration 
review documents, located in each chemical docket at  https://www.regulations.gov .

I. Executive Order 13211: Actions Concerning Regulations That 
Significantly Affect Energy Supply, Distribution or Use

    This action is not subject to Executive Order 13211 (66 FR 28355) 
(May 22, 2001) because it is not a significant regulatory action under 
Executive Order 12866.

J. National Technology Transfer Advancement Act (NTTAA)

    This action does not involve technical standards that would require 
Agency consideration under NTTAA section 12(d), 15 U.S.C. 272.

K. Congressional Review Act (CRA)

    This action is subject to the CRA, 5 U.S.C. 801 et seq., and EPA 
will submit a rule report to each House of the Congress and to the 
Comptroller General of the United States. This action is not a ``major 
rule'' as defined by 5 U.S.C. 804(2).

List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 180

    Environmental protection, Administrative practice and procedure, 
Agricultural commodities, Pesticides and pests, Reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements.

    Dated: June 26, 2026.
Charles Smith,
Director, Registration Division, Office of Pesticide Programs.

    Therefore, 40 CFR chapter I is amended as follows:

PART 180--TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES 
IN FOOD

0
1. The authority citation for part 180 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  21 U.S.C. 321(q), 346a and 371.

0
2. Add Sec.  180.728 to subpart C to read as follows:

Sec.  180.728  Diflufenican; tolerances for residues.

    (a) General. Tolerances are established for residues of the 
herbicide diflufenican, including its metabolites and degradates, in or 
on the commodities in Table 1 to this paragraph (a). Compliance with 
the tolerance levels specified in Table 1 to this paragraph (a) is to 
be determined by measuring only diflufenican, N-(2,4-difluorophenyl)-2-
[3-(trifluoromethyl)phenoxy]-3-pyridinecarboxamide, in or on the 
following commodities.

                        Table 1 to Paragraph (a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Parts per
                        Commodity                             million
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Corn, field, forage.....................................            0.01
Corn, field, grain......................................            0.01
Corn, field, stover.....................................            0.01
Soybean, Forage.........................................            0.01
Soybean, Hay............................................           0.015
Soybean, Seed...........................................            0.01
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) [Reserved]

[FR Doc. 2026-13180 Filed 6-29-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6560-50-P