[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 125 (Wednesday, July 1, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 39879-39895]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-13245]

[[Page 39879]]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

14 CFR Part 1216

[NASA Document Number-26-019; NASA Docket Number-NASA-2026-0100]
RIN 2700-AE80

Procedures for Implementing the National Environmental Policy Act

AGENCY: National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

ACTION: Interim final rule; request for comments.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is 
rescinding and repromulgating its regulations related to environmental 
quality to update the regulations to codify changes to NEPA. NASA has 
determined there is good cause to promulgate its revised NEPA 
implementing regulations in the form of an interim final rule in order 
to avoid confusion related to NASA's administrative process and provide 
NASA action proponents, non-Federal project sponsors of proposed 
actions, and the public with the procedural certainty required to 
efficiently prepare an environmental document under NEPA. Additionally, 
this interim final rule updates NASA's list of existing categorical 
exclusions.

DATES: This interim final rule is effective August 17, 2026. Comments 
are due by July 31, 2026.

ADDRESSES: You may send comments, identified by NASA-2026-0100 to the 
Federal e-Rulemaking Portal: http://www.regulations.gov. Follow the 
instructions for sending comments. If access to the website is not 
feasible, NASA will receive mailed comments to NASA Rulemaking 
Comments--NASA-2026-0100, Environmental Management Division, Suite 
2X84, 300 E Street SW, Washington, DC 20546. As the security screening 
process may delay mail sent through the U.S. Postal Service, NASA 
encourages electronic submittal directly through the e-Rulemaking 
Portal described above. Before including your address, phone number, 
email address, or other personally identifiable information (PII) in 
your comment, you should be aware that your entire comment, including 
your PII, will be posted without change to https://www.regulations.gov. 
Do not submit electronically any information you consider to be 
private, Confidential Business Information, or other information the 
disclosure of which is restricted by statute, as it may be made 
publicly available at any time. While you can request to withhold your 
PII or other sensitive information from public review as part of the 
overall comment submittal, NASA cannot guarantee the execution of such 
a request.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Nick Murdock, 
 [email&#160;protected] . General information about NASA's NEPA 
process is available on the NASA NEPA Portal and NEPA Library at http:/
/www.nasa.gov/emd/nepa.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Background

    The NEPA, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq., requires all Federal 
agencies to assess the environmental impact of their actions. NEPA does 
not mandate results or substantive outcomes, rather, NEPA requires 
Federal agencies to consider the environmental effects of proposed 
actions as part of that agency's decision-making processes. Seven 
County Infrastructure Coalition v. Eagle County, Colorado, 605 U.S. 
168, 180 (2025) NEPA provides requirements to facilitate timely and 
unified Federal reviews, including provisions clarifying lead, joint 
lead, and cooperating agency designations; generally requiring the 
development of a single environmental document; directing agencies to 
develop procedures for project sponsors to prepare environmental 
assessments and environmental impact statements; and prescribing page 
limits and deadlines. 42 U.S.C. 4336a. NEPA also sets forth the 
circumstances under which agencies may rely on programmatic 
environmental documents, 42 U.S.C. 4336b, and adopt and use another 
agency's categorical exclusions. 42 U.S.C. 4336c.
    NEPA identifies three levels of review--categorical exclusion, 
environmental assessment, and environmental impact statement. 42 U.S.C. 
4336a. A categorical exclusion is a ``a category of actions that a 
federal agency has determined normally does not significantly affect 
the quality of the human environment within the meaning of NEPA section 
102(2)(C).'' 42 U.S.C. 4336e (1). An environmental assessment is a 
``concise'' document ``set[ting] forth the basis of [an] agency's 
finding of no significant impact or determination that an environmental 
impact statement is necessary,'' prepared in connection with a proposed 
agency action that does not have a significant impact, or the 
significance of whose impact is unknown. 42 U.S.C. 4336(b)(2). An 
environmental impact statement is a document analyzing a proposed 
agency action with significant impact, governed by the provisions of 42 
U.S.C. 4332(2)(C) and 4336(b)(1). Agencies must prepare an 
environmental impact statement--``in essence, a report''--for proposed 
``major federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the 
human environment.'' 42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C); Seven County, 605 U.S. at 
173. This statement must address: (1) the reasonably foreseeable 
environmental effects of the proposed agency action; (2) any reasonably 
foreseeable adverse environmental effects that cannot be avoided should 
the proposal be implemented; (3) a reasonable range of alternatives to 
the proposed agency action, including an analysis of any negative 
environmental impacts of not implementing the proposed agency action in 
the case of a no action alternative, that are technically and 
economically feasible, and meet the purpose and need of the proposal; 
(4) the relationship between local short-term uses of man's environment 
and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity; and (5) 
any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of Federal resources 
which would be involved in the proposed action should it be 
implemented. 42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C).
    On January 20, 2025, President Donald J. Trump issued Executive 
Order (E.O.) 14154, Unleashing American Energy.\1\ E.O. 14154 rescinded 
E.O. 11991, Relating to Protection and Enhancement of Environmental 
Quality,\2\ which rescinded E.O. 11514, Protection and Enhancement of 
Environmental Quality.\3\ E.O. 11514 had directed the CEQ to promulgate 
regulations for implementing NEPA and required Federal agencies to 
comply with those regulations. On February 25, 2025, CEQ issued an 
interim final rule with an effective date of April 11, 2025,\4\ 
removing its existing NEPA implementing regulations at 40 CFR parts 
1500 through 1508 (CEQ regulations), which CEQ adopted as final on 
January 8, 2026.\5\ E.O. 14154 also directed CEQ to issue guidance to 
Federal departments and agencies on revising their own internal NEPA 
implementing procedures (or establish such procedures if not already 
established) to expedite permitting approvals and for consistency with 
Title I of NEPA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ 90 FR 8353 (January 29, 2025).
    \2\ 42 FR 26967 (May 24, 1977).
    \3\ 35 FR 4247 (March 7, 1970).
    \4\ 90 FR 10610.
    \5\ 91 FR 618.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In 2023, Congress added substantial detail and direction in Title I 
of NEPA, including on procedural issues that CEQ

[[Page 39880]]

addressed in its regulations and that individual action agencies had 
previously addressed in their own NEPA implementing procedures. NASA 
recognized the need to update its regulations considering these 
significant legislative changes. Since NASA's regulations were 
originally written in accordance with CEQ's NEPA implementing 
regulations, NASA had been awaiting CEQ action before substantially 
revising its regulations,\6\ consistent with CEQ direction. See 40 CFR 
1507.3(b) (2024); see also 86 FR 34154 (June 29, 2021). However, with 
CEQ's regulations now rescinded, it is exigent that NASA quickly 
conforms its procedures to the statute as amended.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \6\ NASA updated these NEPA implementing regulations in 2024 to, 
among other things, revise and establish categorical exclusions. 89 
FR 25497 (April 11, 2024). However, NASA proposed that revision 
prior to the enactment of the FRA, the recission of the CEQ's 
regulations and the amendment from the OBBBA. See 88 FR 27804 (May 
3, 2023). Therefore, the 2024 revision did not comprehensively 
address the recent changes and statutory amendments to NEPA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Moreover, on May 29, 2025, the Supreme Court issued the landmark 
Seven County Infrastructure Coalition decision, in which it decried the 
``transform[ation]'' of NEPA from its roots as ``a modest procedural 
requirement,'' into a significant ``substantive roadblock'' that 
``paralyze[s]'' agency decision making. 605 U.S at 173, 183). The 
Supreme Court explained that part of that problem had been caused by 
decisions of lower courts, which it rejected, issuing a ``course 
correction'' mandating that courts give ``substantial deference'' to 
reasonable agency conclusions underlying their NEPA processes. Id. at 
180, 184. But the Court also acknowledged, and through its course 
correction sought to address, the effect on ``litigation-averse 
agencies'' which, considering judicial ``micromanagement,'' had been 
``taking ever more time and preparing ever longer environmental impact 
statements for future projects.'' Id. at 183.
    Additionally, Congress again amended NEPA in 2025 through section 
60026 of the One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA), Public Law 119-21 
(July 4, 2025), adding section 112 of NEPA, entitled ``Project Sponsor 
Opt-in Fees for Environmental Reviews.'' This provision allows project 
sponsors to pay a fee to obtain shortened NEPA review.
    NASA's existing NEPA implementing regulations are currently 
codified in 14 CFR 1216.3 (Procedures for Implementing the National 
Environmental Policy Act). In addition to reflecting the foregoing 
changes to the NEPA law and practice, NASA's revised implementing 
regulations make the following changes: (1) They incorporate nineteen 
previously adopted categorical exclusions from the Federal Rail 
Administration (FRA), Department of Energy (DOE), National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), U.S. Coast 
Guard (USCG), U.S. Forest Service (USFS), U.S. Air Force (USAF), 
Department of the Air Force (DAF), Department of the Navy, Missile 
Defense Agency (MDA), Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), and 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Notices of the NASA adoptions 
were published at 89 FR 31772 (Apr. 25, 2024) and 91 FR 7535 (Feb. 18, 
2026). (2) They remove two administrative categorical exclusions, 
previously listed at Sec.  1216.304(d)(1)(ii) and (v), which fall 
outside NEPA's definition for major Federal action. (3) They make 
conforming administrative changes to 14 CFR part 1216 to accurately 
reflect NASA's current environmental policy related to consideration of 
the environmental impacts of NASA, or non-Federal project sponsor, 
proposed actions.
    Since NASA's last NEPA regulatory revision in 2024, NASA's mission, 
programs, and strategic goals have remained steadfast and focused on 
leading a new era of human space exploration, performing transformative 
aeronautics technology research, and continuing to study our planet and 
the solar system. The rapid pace of growth of NASA's commercial 
partners in the commercial space launch and exploration industry is 
driving an expansion of economic activity in Low Earth Orbit, with 
sights set on establishing a permanent human presence on the Moon and 
Mars. This dynamic space exploration environment dictates that NASA 
implements NEPA regulations that streamline the environmental review 
process but also ensure accurate and unbiased analysis which decision 
makers and the public can rely on.
    The regulations in this interim final rule build upon decades of 
NASA NEPA experience and seek to better align the regulations with 
NASA's evolving technology and mission demands. NASA's NEPA regulations 
and policy will continue to be available on NASA's Public Portal at 
http://www.nasa.gov/emd/nepa/ (under ``NEPA Process''). Consistent with 
section 102(2)(B) of NEPA (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(B), which directs all 
agencies of the Federal Government to identify and develop methods and 
procedures, in consultation with CEQ, to conduct the environmental 
analysis that NEPA requires, NASA consulted with CEQ throughout the 
development of this interim final rule.

II. Introduction

    NASA is amending its regulations for implementing the requirements 
of NEPA. This revision to NASA's NEPA implementing regulations became 
necessary after the CEQ issued an interim final rule rescinding its 
NEPA implementing regulations (formerly 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508) 
on February 25, 2025,\7\ which was subsequently finalized on January 8, 
2026.\8\ NASA had incorporated CEQ's now-rescinded regulations by 
reference into its own NEPA implementing regulations at 14 CFR 
1216.300(b). NASA also needed to revise the regulations to conform to 
the statutory requirements of NEPA as amended by the FRA and the OBBBA. 
In addition, these revisions reflect the Supreme Court's Seven County 
decision. The amended regulations help avoid potential confusion by 
providing regulatory certainty to NASA project proponents and non-
Federal project sponsors who propose actions on NASA facilities and how 
NASA, or in some cases, non-Federal project sponsors, should undertake 
preparation of environmental documents that inform both Federal 
decision makers and the public on the potential environmental impacts 
of NASA and non-Federal project sponsor proposed actions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \7\ 90 FR 10610 (Feb. 25, 2025).
    \8\ 91 FR 618 (Jan. 8, 2026).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

III. Basis for Issuing an Interim Final Rule

A. Notice and Comment Rulemaking Is Not Required

    Notice and comment are not required because this interim final rule 
falls within the APA's exception for ``interpretative rules, general 
statements of policy, or rules of agency organization, procedure, or 
practice.'' 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(A). The legal authority for NASA to proceed 
with this regulatory action is found in the Space Act, 51 U.S.C. 20101 
et. seq. Pursuant to 51 U.S.C. 20113, the NASA Administrator is 
authorized to ``make, promulgate, issue, rescind, and amend rules and 
regulations governing the manner of NASA operations and the exercise of 
powers vested in it by law.'' Further, the NEPA statute directs the 
Federal Government to ``use all practicable means, consistent with 
other essential considerations of national policy, to improve and 
coordinate federal plans, functions, programs, and resources'' to

[[Page 39881]]

assure Americans will continue to live in a ``safe, healthful, [and] 
productive'' environment (42 U.S.C. 4331(b)). NEPA is a ``purely 
procedural statute'' which ``simply prescribes the necessary process 
for an agency's environmental review of a project--a review that is, 
even in its most rigorous form, ``only one input into an agency's 
decision and does not itself require any particular substantive 
outcome.'' Seven County, 145 S. Ct. at 1507, 1511 (internal quotation 
omitted).
    ``NEPA imposes no substantive constraints on the agency's ultimate 
decision to build, fund, or approve a proposed project,'' and ``is 
relevant only to the question of whether an agency's final decision''--
i.e., that decision to authorize, fund, or otherwise carry out a 
particular proposed project or activity--``was reasonably explained.'' 
Id. at 1511. Thus, NASA's regulations implementing NEPA do not dictate 
what outcomes such consideration must produce, nor do they impose 
binding legal obligations on private citizens. Rather, they prescribe 
the procedure by which NASA should conduct its NEPA reviews (e.g., 
detailing the structure of environmental impact statements, specifying 
procedural requirements, and directing the timing of public comment 
periods).
    Although NASA is voluntarily providing notice and an opportunity to 
comment on the interim final rule, the agency has determined that 
notice and comment procedures are not required because this interim 
final rule falls within the APA exception for ``rules of agency 
organization, procedure, or practice.'' 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(A).
    In addition, NASA's regulations implementing NEPA's procedural 
requirements may be characterized as rules of agency organization, 
procedure, or practice. NASA's regulations prescribe how NASA action 
proponents and non-Federal project sponsors should conduct NEPA 
reviews: detailing the administrative process applicable to preparation 
of environmental documents. The NASA regulations do not prescribe 
substantive environmental policies or command particular outcomes. 
Promulgation of rules of agency organization, procedure, or practice 
does not require notice and comment. See 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(A).

B. NASA Has Good Cause for Proceeding With an Interim Final Rule

    The APA authorizes agencies to issue regulations without notice and 
public comment when an agency finds, for good cause, that notice and 
comment is ``impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the public 
interest,'' 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B). NASA finds that, to the extent that 
prior notice and solicitation of public comment would otherwise be 
required, the need to expeditiously and unambiguously resolve potential 
internal agency mission planner, non-Federal project sponsor, and 
public confusion regarding NASA's NEPA implementing procedures 
satisfies the ``good cause'' exception in 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B).
    NASA's current NEPA implementing regulations, regulations at 14 CFR 
part 1216, ``adopts CEQ's regulations implementing NEPA (40 CFR parts 
1500 through 1508) and supplements those regulations.'' 14 CFR 
1216.300(b). Thus, NASA's regulations supplement a NEPA paradigm that 
no longer exists since the recission of CEQ's regulations. NASA thus 
far and as a temporary emergency measure, has been continuing to 
operate under its prior procedures as if the CEQ regulations still 
existed. This is not, however, tenable for the long term. Now that 
proper procedures are available, NASA must rescind its out-of-date 
regulations and update to conform to the recent statutory changes. 
Because E.O. 14154 rescinded E.O. 11991 and CEQ removed its regulations 
at 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508, this interim final rule is a 
necessary but ministerial step to align NASA's regulations with the 
current NEPA landscape. Rescinding the current NEPA implementing 
regulation without replacing it would create a vacuum that would 
inflict immense uncertainty and potentially grind all projects under 
NASA's purview to a halt. Therefore, pairing the rescission with a new 
structure is critical.
    Because of this need for speed and certainty, notice and comment 
are, to the extent required at all, impracticable and contrary to the 
public interest. To the extent that public comment may suggest further 
revisions are warranted, NASA's solicitation of public comment for 30 
days following the publication of the rule is intended to accommodate 
that possibility. But, to the extent that this interim final rule would 
otherwise require a proposal and solicitation of public comment, NASA's 
view is that the ``good cause'' exception (5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B)) pertains 
here.
    Though NASA seeks comments to obtain the public's views, such 
comments could not alter the legal realities--most notably the repeal 
of the CEQ's NEPA implementing regulations and the rescission of the 
E.O. that purported to authorize them, the recission of the CEQ 
regulations and the statutory amendment from the OBBBA--that create the 
swift need for such a change. NASA will consider comments submitted in 
response to this action and address them when issuing a final rule, 
with changes, if warranted, after consideration of the comments 
received. For these reasons and those above, NASA finds that ``good 
cause'' exists under 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(3) to forgo the 30-day delay of 
the effective date. Accordingly, this rulemaking will be effective 
immediately.

IV. Development Process

    After the CEQ issued its Memorandum for Heads of Federal 
Departments and Agencies on February 19, 2025, and published an interim 
final rule to remove its NEPA implementing regulations (40 CFR parts 
1500 through 1508) on February 25, 2025 (effective April 11, 2025), 
with final rule on January 8, 2026, NASA formed a working group to 
review 14 CFR part 1216, subparts 1216.1 and 1216.3 (subpart 1216.2 is 
``reserved'').\9\ The working group was comprised of current NASA 
environmental professionals with numerous years of NEPA planning and 
compliance history. NASA consulted with the CEQ throughout the 
development of this interim final rule to ensure consistency with the 
requirements of NEPA, Administration policy, and CEQ guidance and, to 
the extent practicable, standardize NEPA's administrative process with 
other Executive branch agencies which are engaged in similar regulatory 
or policy making actions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \9\ CEQ issued Memorandum for Heads of Federal Departments and 
Agencies on Implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act 
on September 29, 2025, that superseded the February 25, 2025, 
memorandum and issued a final rule on January 8, 2026, affirming the 
February 25, 2025, interim final rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The revised regulations align NASA's NEPA implementing procedures 
with the statutory requirements of NEPA. The changes promote regulatory 
certainty and administrative efficiency, which will result in 
environmental documents that inform NASA enterprise decision making on 
proposed actions related to space exploration and earth observation 
missions, aeronautics research, launch facilities and activities 
occurring thereon, sounding rocket and balloon campaigns, field 
campaigns, agency master planning, infrastructure, construction and 
maintenance activities, etc. The regulations also clarify non-Federal 
project sponsor procedures for preparation of environmental documents 
for actions that are proposed to occur on NASA jurisdictional property 
or for which NASA has final decision-making authority. Other changes 
include, but are not limited to, implementation of page and time limits

[[Page 39882]]

for preparation of environmental assessments and environmental impact 
statements and an update to NASA's list of existing categorical 
exclusions to incorporate nineteen previously adopted categorical 
exclusions from the Federal Rail Administration (FRA), Department of 
Energy (DOE), National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (NTIA), U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), U.S. Forest Service 
(USFS), U.S. Air Force (USAF), Department of the Air Force (DAF), 
Department of the Navy, Missile Defense Agency (MDA), Defense Threat 
Reduction Agency (DTRA), and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 
Notices of the NASA adoptions were published at 89 FR 31772 (April 25, 
2024) and 91 FR 7535 (February 18, 2026). Specifically, NASA is 
removing the categorical exclusions for the two administrative 
activities listed at 40 CFR 1216.304(d)(1)(ii) and (v) for ``issuing 
procedural rules, manuals, directives, and requirements'' and 
``information-gathering exercises, such as inventories, audits, and 
studies.'' Consistent with the definition in section 111(10) of NEPA 
for major Federal action (42 U.S.C. 4336(e)(10)), NASA does not 
consider these categories of actions to be major Federal actions and 
therefore NEPA does not apply.
    The NASA working group compared NASA's current regulations with 
NEPA's statutory requirements, past CEQ implementing regulations which 
would provide an improved administrative framework to promote 
regulatory certainty and administrative efficiency during the 
development of environmental documents, NASA's existing regulations, 
and NASA's underlying policies, procedures, programs, and missions to 
determine what specific updates to NASA's implementing regulations were 
required. The following is the structure of the new regulations:

Part 1216 Environmental Quality
Subpart 1216.1 Purpose and Policy
    1216.100 Purpose and policy
    1216.101 Applicability
Subpart 1216.2 NEPA and Agency Planning
    1216.200 Determine when NEPA applies
    1216.201 Determine the appropriate level of NEPA review
    1216.202 NEPA and agency decision making
Subpart 1216.3 Categorical Exclusions
    1216.300 Preparation of categorical exclusions
Subpart 1216.4 Environmental assessments
    1216.400 Preparation of environmental assessments
    1216.401 Findings of no significant impact
Subpart 1216.5 Environmental Impact Statements
    1216.500 Preparation of environmental impact statements
    1216.501 Purpose and need
    1216.502 Analysis within the environmental impact statement
    1216.503 Page limits
    1216.504 Deadlines
    1216.505 Publication of the environmental documents
Subpart 1216.6 Efficient Environmental Reviews
    1216.600 Lead, cooperating, and participating agencies 1216.601 
Public notice during the NEPA process
    1216.602 Programmatic environmental documents, tiering, reliance, 
and incorporation by reference
    1216.603 Combining documents
    1216.604 Supplements to environmental documents
    1216.605 Integrity and completeness of information
    1216.606 Integrating NEPA with other environmental requirements
    1216.607 Mitigation and monitoring
    1216.608 Elimination of duplication with State, Tribal, and local 
procedures
    1216.609 Emergencies
    1216.610 Classified actions
Subpart 1216.7 Agency Decision Making
    1216.700 Decision documents
    1216.701 Filing requirements
Subpart 1216.8 Procedures for Non-Federal Project Sponsor-prepared NEPA 
Documents
    1216.800 Procedures for non-Federal project sponsor-prepared 
environmental documents
Subpart 1216.9 Definitions
    1216.900 Definitions
Subpart 1216.10 Severability
    1216.1000 Severability

V. Regulatory Analysis

A. E.O. 12866--Regulatory Planning and Review, and E.O. 13563, 
Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review

    E.O. 12866 provides that the Office of Management and Budget's 
(OMB) Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) will review 
all significant rules. E.O. 13563 affirms the principles of E.O. 12866, 
calling for improvements in the Federal Government's regulatory system 
to promote predictability, reduce uncertainty, and use the best, most 
innovative, and least burdensome tools for achieving regulatory 
objectives. E.O.s 13563 and 12866 direct agencies to assess all costs 
and benefits of available regulatory alternatives and, if regulation is 
necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits 
(including potential economic, environmental, public health and safety 
effects, distributive impacts, and equity). After conferring with OMB-
OIRA, this interim final rule has been determined to meet the criteria 
under section 3(f) of E.O. 12866 for designation as a ``significant 
regulatory action.'' The rule is also considered to be a deregulatory 
action under E.O. 14192.

B. Review Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act

    The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) requires an 
agency to prepare an initial regulatory flexibility analysis to be 
published at the time the interim final rule is published. This 
requirement does not apply if the agency ``certifies that the rule will 
not, if promulgated, have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities'' (5 U.S.C. 603). This interim 
final rule modifies existing policies and procedural requirements for 
NASA compliance with NEPA. The interim final rule does not regulate 
small entities. Rather, the rule applies to NASA proposed action 
proponents, and non-Federal project sponsors which may seek to 
undertake an activity over which NASA has approval authority and sets 
forth the procedural process for compliance with NEPA. The interim 
final rule makes no substantive changes to requirements imposed on 
applicants for licenses, permits, financial assistance, and similar 
actions as related to NEPA compliance. Therefore, NASA certifies this 
interim final rule does not have a ``significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities.''

C. Review Under the Paperwork Reduction Act

    This interim final rule does not contain any information collection 
requirements subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 
3501 et seq.).

D. Environmental Review Under the NEPA

    The interim final rule revises agency procedures and guidance for 
implementing NEPA. NASA NEPA implementing procedures are procedural 
guidance to assist in the fulfillment of agency responsibilities under 
NEPA but are not the agency's final determination of what level of NEPA 
analysis is required for a particular proposed action. NEPA does not 
require agencies to conduct NEPA

[[Page 39883]]

analyses or prepare NEPA documentation when establishing their own NEPA 
procedures. The determination that establishing agency NEPA procedures 
does not require supporting NEPA analysis and documentation has been 
upheld in Heartwood, Inc. v. U.S. Forest Service, 73 F. Supp. 2d 962, 
972-73 (S.D. Ill. 1999), aff'd, 230 F.3d 947, 954-55 (7th Cir. 2000).

E. Review Under E.O. 13132, Federalism

    NASA has considered this interim final rule under the requirements 
of E.O. 13132, Federalism. The Agency has concluded that the interim 
final rule conforms with the federalism principles set out in this 
E.O., will not impose any compliance costs on the states, and will not 
have substantial direct effects on the states or the relationship 
between the National Government and the States or on the distribution 
of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government. 
Therefore, NASA has determined that no further assessment of federalism 
implications is necessary.

F. Review Under the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act

    Pursuant to Title II of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (UMRA) of 
1995 (2 U.S.C. 1531-1538), NASA has assessed the effects of the interim 
final rule on State, local, and Tribal governments, and the private 
sector. This interim final rule would not compel the expenditure of 
$100 million or more by any State, local, or Tribal government, or 
anyone in the private sector. Therefore, this interim final rule is not 
subject to the requirements of section 202 and 205 of the UMRA.

G. E.O. 13175, Consultation and Coordination With Indian Tribal 
Governments

    E.O. 13175 requires agencies to have a process to ensure meaningful 
and timely input by Tribal officials in the development of policies 
that have Tribal implications. Such policies include regulations that 
have substantial direct effects on one or more Indian Tribes, on the 
relationship between the Federal Government and Indian Tribes, or on 
the distribution of power and responsibilities between the Federal 
Government and Indian Tribes. This interim final rule is not a 
regulatory policy that has Tribal implications because it does not 
impose substantial direct compliance costs on Tribal governments 
(section 5(b)) and does not preempt Tribal law (section 5(c)).

H. E.O. 13211, Regulations That Significantly Affect Energy Supply, 
Distribution, or Use

    Agencies must prepare a Statement of Energy Effects for significant 
energy actions under E.O. 13211. This interim final rule is not a 
``significant energy action'' because it is not likely to have a 
significant adverse effect on the supply, distribution, or use of 
energy.

I. E.O. 12988, Civil Justice Reform

    Under section 3(a) E.O. 12988, agencies must review their proposed 
regulations to eliminate drafting errors and ambiguities, draft them to 
minimize litigation, and provide a clear legal standard for affected 
conduct. Section 3(b) provides a list of specific issues for review to 
conduct the reviews required by section 3(a). NASA has conducted this 
review and determined that this interim final rule complies with the 
requirements of E.O. 12988.

J. Expected Impact of the Final Rule

    NASA does not expect this interim final rule to have any economic 
impact on the overall economy of the United States; State, local, or 
Tribal governments or communities; or any private party involved in 
commercial space launch activities at NASA facilities. Given the most 
recent data NASA has available, most NASA actions fall within the scope 
of a categorical exclusion (98 percent categorically excluded, 1.4 
percent had an environmental assessment/finding of no significant 
impact, and 0.16 percent had an environmental impact statement/record 
of decision). By implementing the requirements of NEPA and aligning 
NASA's procedures with guidance provided by the CEQ, this interim final 
rule promotes more standardized, legally sufficient, and streamlined 
NEPA compliance.
    The interim final rule does not raise novel legal or policy issues; 
rather it promotes consistency with the law, thereby providing more 
regulatory certainty concerning NEPA compliance obligations to both 
NASA programs and non-Federal project sponsors who may propose actions 
that would occur on NASA jurisdictional facilities. Therefore, this 
interim final rule is not expected to have any adverse effect, 
economically or otherwise, on NASA, any other Federal, State, local, or 
Tribal entity, or any private party who may propose an action that 
would occur at a NASA jurisdictional facility.

List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 1216

    Environmental impact statements, Flood plains, Foreign relations.

Nakia Marks,
Team Lead, NASA Directives and Regulations.

    For the reasons given in the preamble, NASA revises 14 CFR part 
1216 to read as follows:

PART 1216--ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

Sec.
Subpart 1216.1--Purpose and Policy
1216.100 Purpose and policy.
1216.101 Applicability.
Subpart 1216.2--NEPA and Agency Planning
1216.200 Determine when NEPA applies.
1216.201 Determine the appropriate level of NEPA review.
1216.202 NEPA and agency decision making.
Subpart 1216.3--Categorical Exclusions
1216.300 Preparation of categorical exclusions.
Subpart 1216.4--Environmental Assessments
1216.400 Preparation of environmental assessments.
1216.401 Findings of no significant impact.
Subpart 1216.5--Environmental Impact Statements
1216.500 Preparation of environmental impact statements.
1216.501 Purpose and need.
1216.502 Analysis within the environmental impact statement.
1216.503 Page limits.
1216.504 Deadlines.
1216.505 Publication of the environmental documents.
Subpart 1216.6--Efficient Environmental Reviews
1216.600 Lead, cooperating, and participating agencies.
1216.601 Public notice during the NEPA process.
1216.602 Programmatic environmental documents, tiering, reliance, 
and incorporation by reference.
1216.603 Combining documents.
1216.604 Supplements to environmental documents.
1216.605 Integrity and completeness of information.
1216.606 Integrating NEPA with other environmental requirements.
1216.607 Mitigation and monitoring.
1216.608 Elimination of duplication with State, Tribal, and local 
procedures.
1216.609 Emergencies.
1216.610 Classified actions.
Subpart 1216.7--Agency Decision Making
1216.700 Decision documents.
1216.701 Filing requirements.

[[Page 39884]]

Subpart 1216.8--Procedures for Non-Federal Project Sponsor-prepared 
NEPA Documents
1216.800 Procedures for non-Federal project sponsor-prepared 
environmental documents.
Subpart 1216.9--Definitions
1216.900 Definitions.
Subpart 1216.10--Severability
1216.1000 Severability.

    Authority: 51 U.S.C. 20101 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.; 42 
U.S.C. 7609 et seq.

Subpart 1216.1--Purpose and Policy

Sec.  1216.100  Purpose and policy.

    (a) Purpose. The purpose of the procedures in this part is to 
integrate the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) into the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration's (NASA) decision-making 
processes. The procedures in this part describe the process by which 
NASA determines what actions are subject to NEPA's procedural 
requirements and the applicable level of NEPA review; ensure that 
relevant environmental information is identified and considered early 
in the process in order to ensure informed decision making; enable NASA 
to conduct coordinated, consistent, predictable and timely 
environmental reviews; reduce unnecessary burdens and delays; and 
implement NEPA's mandates regarding lead and cooperating agency roles, 
page and time limits, and sponsor preparation of environmental 
documents.
    (b) Procedural and interpretive rule. This part sets forth NASA's 
procedures for implementing NEPA and NASA's interpretation of certain 
key terms in NEPA. It does not, nor does it intend to, govern the 
rights and obligations of any party outside the Federal Government. It 
does, however, establish the procedures under which NASA will fulfill 
its requirements under NEPA.
    (c) Consultation with the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 
In accord with NEPA sec. 102(2)(B), 42 U.S.C. 4332(B), NASA will 
consult with CEQ while developing or revising proposed NEPA 
implementing procedures under this part, including establishment of 
new, or revision of existing, categorical exclusions as set forth in 
subpart 1216.3 of this part.

Sec.  1216.101  Applicability.

    (a) Applicability. This part is applicable to all organizational 
elements of NASA.
    (b) Authority. Nothing contained in this part is intended to or 
should be construed to limit NASA's existing authorities or legal 
responsibilities.

Subpart 1216.2--NEPA and Agency Planning

Sec.  1216.200  Determine when NEPA applies.

    (a) NEPA applies to major Federal actions as defined in section 
111(10) of NEPA, 42 U.S.C. 4336e (10). The terms ``major'' and 
``Federal action,'' each have independent force. NEPA applies only when 
both criteria are met. Such a determination is inherently bound up in 
the facts and circumstances of each individual situation and is thus 
reserved to the discretion of NASA in each instance.
    (b) NASA will determine that NEPA does not apply to a proposed 
agency action when:
    (1) The activities or decision do not result in final agency action 
under the Administrative Procedure Act, see 5 U.S.C. 704, or other 
relevant statute that also includes a finality requirement.
    (2) The proposed activity or decision is exempted from NEPA by law.
    (3) Compliance with NEPA would clearly and fundamentally conflict 
with the requirements of another provision of law.
    (4) In circumstances where Congress by statute has prescribed 
decisional criteria with sufficient completeness and precision such 
that NASA retains no residual discretion to alter its action based on 
the consideration of environmental factors, thus that function of NASA 
is nondiscretionary within the meaning of NEPA sec. 106(a)(4) and/or 
sec. 111(10)(B)(vii) (42 U.S.C. 4336(a)(4) and 4336e(10)(B)(vii), 
respectively), and NEPA does not apply to the action in question.
    (5) The proposed action is an action for which another statute's 
requirements serve the function of agency compliance with the Act.
    (6) NEPA does not apply to response actions taken under the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
(CERCLA) (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.).

Sec.  1216.201  Determine the appropriate level of NEPA review.

    (a) If NASA determines that NEPA applies to a proposed activity or 
decision, NASA will then determine the appropriate level of NEPA review 
in the following sequence and manner. At all steps in the following 
process, NASA will consider the proposed action or project at hand and 
its effects.
    (1) If NASA has established, or adopted pursuant to NEPA sec. 109, 
42 U.S.C. 4336c, a categorical exclusion that covers the proposed 
action, NASA will analyze whether to apply the categorical exclusion to 
the proposed action and apply the categorical exclusion, if 
appropriate, pursuant to subpart 1216.3 of this part.
    (2) If another agency has already established a categorical 
exclusion that covers the proposed action, NASA will commence the 
process to adopt that exclusion pursuant to Sec.  1216.300(c) so that 
it can be applied to the proposed action at issue, and to future 
activities or decisions of that type.
    (3) If the proposed action warrants the establishment of a new 
categorical exclusion, or the revision of an existing categorical 
exclusion, NASA will consider whether to establish or revise and then 
apply the categorical exclusion to the proposed action and to future 
activities or decisions of that type.
    (4) If NASA or another Federal agency has already analyzed the 
proposed action in an existing environmental assessment or 
environmental impact statement, NASA will consider the options outlined 
in Sec.  1216.602 and rely on the existing NEPA analysis.
    (5) If NASA cannot apply a categorical exclusion to or rely on an 
existing NEPA analysis for the proposed action, NASA will consider the 
proposed action's reasonably foreseeable effects consistent with 
paragraph (b) of this section, and then will:
    (i) If the proposed action is not likely to have reasonably 
foreseeable significant effects or the significance of the effects is 
unknown, develop an environmental assessment, as described in subpart 
1216.4 of this part; or
    (ii) If the proposed action is likely to have reasonably 
foreseeable significant effects, develop an environmental impact 
statement, as described in subpart 1216.5 of this part.
    (b) When considering whether the reasonably foreseeable effects of 
the proposed action are significant, NASA will analyze the potentially 
affected environment and degree of the effects of the action. NASA may 
use any reliable data source and will not undertake new research unless 
it is essential to evaluating alternatives and the cost and time of 
obtaining it are not unreasonable.
    (1) In considering the potentially affected environment, NASA may 
consider, as appropriate to the specific action, the scope of affected 
area (national, regional, or local) and its resources (e.g., natural, 
cultural, and socioeconomic resources; and environmental media).
    (2) In considering the degree of the effects, NASA may consider the 
following, as appropriate to the specific action:
    (i) Both short- and long-term effects.
    (ii) Both beneficial and adverse effects.

[[Page 39885]]

    (iii) Effects on public health and safety.
    (iv) Economic effects.
    (v) Effects on the quality of life of the American people.

Sec.  1216.202  NEPA and agency decision making.

    (a) Planning. NEPA is a procedural statute intended to ensure 
Federal agencies consider the environmental impacts of their proposed 
actions in the decision-making process. Full and early integration of 
the NEPA process with NASA project and program planning improves agency 
decisions.
    (b) Limitations on actions during the NEPA process. Except as 
provided in paragraph (c) of this section, until NASA issues a record 
of decision or finding of no significant impact, or makes a categorical 
exclusion determination, as applicable, NASA will take no action 
concerning a proposed action that would have an adverse environmental 
effect; or limit the choice of reasonable alternatives.
    (c) Actions developed by non-Federal project sponsor. If NASA is 
considering a proposed action from a non-Federal entity and becomes 
aware that the non-Federal project sponsor is about to take an action 
within NASA's jurisdiction that would meet either of the criteria in 
paragraph (b) of this section, NASA will promptly notify the non-
Federal project sponsor that NASA will take appropriate action to 
ensure that the objectives and procedures of NEPA are achieved. This 
section does not preclude development by non-Federal project sponsors 
of plans or designs or performance of other activities necessary to 
support an application for Federal, State, Tribal, or local permits or 
assistance. When considering a proposed action for Federal funding, 
NASA may authorize such activities, including but not limited to, 
acquisition of interests in land (e.g., fee simple, rights-of-way, and 
conservation easements), purchase of long lead-time equipment, and 
purchase options made by non-Federal project sponsors.
    (d) Non-Federal project sponsor preparation of environmental 
documents. A non-Federal project sponsor may prepare an environmental 
assessment or environmental impact statement under NASA's supervision. 
NASA's requirements for third-party- prepared environmental assessments 
and environmental impact statements are included in subpart 1216.8 of 
this part. For proposed actions that are initially developed by non-
Federal entities, NASA will:
    (1) Coordinate with the non-Federal project sponsor at the earliest 
reasonable time in the planning process to inform the project sponsor 
what information NASA will need to comply with NEPA and establish a 
schedule for completing steps in the NEPA review process, consistent 
with NEPA's statutory deadlines and any internal agency NEPA schedule 
requirements.
    (2) Begin the NEPA process by determining whether NEPA applies, as 
described in Sec.  1216.200, and if it does, determine the appropriate 
level of NEPA review, as described in Sec.  1216.201.
    (e) Real Estate Actions. NASA must comply with this subpart when 
considering issuance of a permit, license, enhanced use lease (EUL), 
easement, right of way, or grant, to a Federal or a non-Federal party, 
as may be applicable, and seek such Federal or non-Federal party's 
assistance in obtaining necessary information and completing the NEPA 
process.

Subpart 1216.3--Categorical Exclusions

Sec.  1216.300  Preparation of categorical exclusions.

    (a) Generally. This section describes the process NASA uses for 
establishing and revising categorical exclusions, for adopting other 
agencies' categorical exclusions, and for applying categorical 
exclusions to a proposed agency action. NASA's categorical exclusions 
are listed in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (b) Establishing and revising categorical exclusions. To establish 
or revise a categorical exclusion, NASA will determine that the 
category of actions normally does not significantly affect the quality 
of the human environment. In making this determination, NASA will:
    (1) Develop a substantiation record containing information to 
support its determination.
    (2) Consult with CEQ on its proposed categorical exclusion, 
including the substantiation record, for a period not to exceed 30 days 
prior to providing public notice.
    (3) Provide public notice in the Federal Register of NASA's 
establishment or revisions of the categorical exclusion, including the 
location (e.g., website) of availability of the substantiation record.
    (c) Adopting categorical exclusions from other Federal agencies. 
Consistent with NEPA sec. 109, 42 U.S.C. 4336c, NASA may adopt a 
categorical exclusion listed in another agency's NEPA procedures. When 
adopting a categorical exclusion, NASA will:
    (1) Identify the categorical exclusion listed in another agency's 
NEPA procedures that covers its category of proposed or related 
actions.
    (2) Consult with the agency that established the categorical 
exclusion to ensure that the proposed adoption of the categorical 
exclusion is appropriate.
    (3) Provide public notification of the categorical exclusion that 
NASA is adopting, including a brief description of the proposed action 
or category of proposed actions to which NASA intends to apply the 
adopted categorical exclusion.
    (4) Document the adoption of the categorical exclusion on a public-
facing website and include in future updates to this part.
    (d) Removal of categorical exclusions. To remove a categorical 
exclusion from paragraph (g) of this section, NASA will:
    (1) Develop a written explanation for the removal;
    (2) Consult with CEQ on its proposed removal of the categorical 
exclusion, including the written explanation (typically for a period of 
30 days) prior to providing public notice; and
    (3) Provide public notice of NASA's removal of the categorical 
exclusion and the written explanation in the Federal Register. NASA may 
provide notice of the availability of the explanation in the Federal 
Register (i.e., as a link to an agency website) if NASA prepares the 
explanation as a separate document.
    (e) Applying categorical exclusions. A proposed action may be 
categorically excluded if the action fits within the categories listed 
in paragraph (g) of this section, and does not involve any 
extraordinary circumstances in which a normally excluded action may 
have a reasonably foreseeable significant effect. If NASA determines 
that it cannot apply a categorical exclusion to the proposed action, 
NASA will prepare an environmental assessment or environmental impact 
statement, as appropriate.
    (1) If an extraordinary circumstance is not present, NASA will 
determine that the categorical exclusion applies to the proposed agency 
action and conclude review.
    (2) If an extraordinary circumstance is present, NASA may 
nevertheless apply the categorical exclusion and conclude review if 
NASA either:
    (i) Determines that, notwithstanding the extraordinary 
circumstance, the proposed agency action is not likely to result in 
reasonably foreseeable adverse significant effects; or
    (ii) Modifies the proposed agency action to avoid those effects.
    (3) Extraordinary circumstances include situations where the 
proposed action:

[[Page 39886]]

    (i) Has a reasonable likelihood of having a significant effect on 
public health and safety.
    (ii) Imposes uncertain or unique environmental risks.
    (iii) Is of significantly greater scope or size than is normal for 
the category of action.
    (iv) Has a reasonable likelihood of having effects that would 
violate Federal, State, Tribal, or local laws, or other enforceable 
requirements applicable to environmental protection.
    (v) May significantly affect sensitive resources, such as, but not 
limited to, federally listed threatened or endangered species, their 
designated critical habitat, wilderness areas, floodplains, wetlands, 
aquifer recharge areas, coastal zones, wild and scenic rivers, and 
significant fish or wildlife habitat, unless the impact has been 
resolved through another environmental review process (e.g., the Clean 
Water Act (CWA) or the Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA)).
    (vi) May significantly affect national natural landmarks or 
cultural or historic resources, including, but not limited to, property 
listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic 
Places, unless the impact has been resolved through another review 
process (e.g., the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)).
    (4) NASA may apply multiple categorical exclusions to the 
constituent parts of a single action but must consider whether the 
aggregate impacts of the constituent parts could give rise to an 
extraordinary circumstance or result in reasonably foreseeable 
significant effects.
    (f) Documentation of categorical exclusion determinations. In cases 
where NASA has determined that a Record of Environmental Consideration 
(REC) is required, NASA will document its evaluation, which includes 
the extraordinary circumstance review.
    (g) List of categorical exclusions. NASA has established or adopted 
the following categorical exclusions:
    (1) Administrative Activities including:
    (i) Personnel actions, organizational changes, and procurement of 
routine goods and services.
    (ii) Program budget proposals, disbursements, and transfer or 
reprogramming of funds.
    (iii) Preparing documents, including design and feasibility 
studies, analytical supply and demand studies, reports and 
recommendations, master and strategic plans, and other advisory 
documents.
    (iv) Preparing and disseminating information, including document 
mailings, publications, classroom materials, conferences, speaking 
engagements, websites, and other educational/informational activities.
    (v) Software development, data analysis, and/or testing, including 
computer modeling.
    (vi) Interpretations, amendments, and modifications to contracts, 
grants, or other awards.
    (vii) Field studies, including water sampling, monitoring wells, 
cultural resources surveys, biological surveys, geologic surveys, 
modeling or simulations, routine data collection and analysis, and/or 
temporary equipment.
    (2) Operations and Management Activities including:
    (i) Routine maintenance, minor construction or rehabilitation, 
minor demolition, minor modification, minor repair, and continuing or 
altered operations at, or of, existing NASA or NASA-funded or approved 
facilities and equipment, such as buildings, roads, grounds, utilities, 
communication systems, and ground support systems (e.g., space tracking 
and data systems). This includes routine operations such as security, 
public health and safety, and environmental services.
    (ii) Installing or removing equipment, including component parts, 
at existing government or private facilities.
    (iii) Contributing equipment, software, technical advice, 
exchanging data, and consulting with other agencies and public and 
private entities.
    (iv) NASA ceremonies, commemorative events, and memorial services.
    (v) Routine packaging, labeling, storage, transportation, and 
disposal of materials and wastes, in accordance with applicable 
Federal, State, Tribal, or local laws or requirements. Examples include 
but are not limited to hazardous, non-hazardous, and other regulated 
materials and wastes.
    (vi) Habitat and species management activities conducted within the 
boundaries of NASA-controlled properties in accordance with applicable 
Federal, State, or local requirements. Examples include but are not 
limited to restoration of unique or critical habitat; thinning or brush 
control to improve growth of natural habitat, reduce invasive species, 
or reduce fire hazard; prescribed burning to reduce natural fuel build-
up, reduce invasive species, or improve native plant vigor; planting 
appropriate vegetation that does not include noxious weeds or invasive 
plants; or wildlife management activities (REC required).
    (vii) Small-scale, short-term cleanup actions under the Resource 
Conservation and Recovery Act or other authorities to reduce risk to 
human health or the environment from the release or imminent and 
substantial threat of release of a hazardous substance other than high-
level radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel, including treatment 
(such as incineration, encapsulation, physical or chemical separation, 
and compaction), recovery, storage, or disposal of wastes at existing 
facilities currently handling the type of waste involved in the action.
    (viii) Replacement of existing energy sources with alternative or 
renewable energy sources that comply with existing permit conditions.
    (ix) Routine maintenance, repair, and operation of vessels 
(including unmanned autonomous surface vessels), aircraft (including 
unmanned aircraft systems), overland/surface transportation vehicles, 
and other transportation systems as applicable. Examples include but 
are not limited to transportation or relocation of NASA equipment and 
hardware by barge, aircraft, or surface transportation system (e.g., 
tractor trailer or railroad); retrieval of spent solid rocket boosters 
by vessel; repair or overhaul of vessel, aircraft, or surface 
transportation systems that do not result in a change in the 
environmental impacts of their normal operation.
    (x) Construction of electric powerlines approximately 10 miles in 
length or less, or approximately 20 miles in length or less within 
previously disturbed or developed powerline or pipeline rights-of-way.
    (xi) Construction and subsequent operation of short (generally less 
than 20 miles in length) pipeline segments conveying materials (such as 
air, brine, carbon dioxide, geothermal system fluids, hydrogen gas, 
natural gas, nitrogen gas, oil, produced water, steam, and water) 
between existing source facilities and existing receiving facilities 
(such as facilities for use, reuse, transportation, storage, and 
refining), provided that the pipeline segments are within previously 
disturbed or developed rights-of-way.
    (xii) The installation, modification, operation, or decommissioning 
of commercially available solar photovoltaic systems:
    (A) Located on a building or other structure (such as rooftop, 
parking lot or facility, or mounted to signage, lighting, gates, or 
fences); or
    (B) Located within a previously disturbed or developed area. 
Covered actions would be in accordance with applicable requirements 
(such as land use and zoning requirements) in the proposed project area 
and would be consistent with applicable plans for the management of 
wildlife and habitat,

[[Page 39887]]

including plans to maintain habitat connectivity, and incorporate 
appropriate control technologies and best management practices.
    (xiii) Decisions to decommission or temporarily discontinue use of 
equipment:
    (A) Decisions to decommission or temporarily discontinue use of 
vessels and aircraft. This does not preclude the need to review 
decommissioning under section 106 of the National Historic Preservation 
Act.
    (B) Decisions to decommission or temporarily discontinue use of 
equipment, not including vessels or aircraft. This does not preclude 
the need to review decommissioning under section 106 of the National 
Historic Preservation Act (REC required).
    (xiv) Environmental restoration, remediation, pollution prevention, 
and mitigation activities conducted in conformance with applicable 
laws, regulations and permit requirements, including activities such as 
noise mitigation, landscaping, natural resource management activities, 
replacement or improvement to storm water oil/water separators, 
installation of pollution containment systems, slope stabilization, and 
contaminated soil removal or remediation activities.
    (xv) Assembly or construction of facilities or stations that are 
consistent with existing land use and zoning requirements, do not 
result in a major change in traffic density on existing rail or highway 
facilities, and result in approximately less than ten acres of surface 
disturbance, such as storage and maintenance facilities, freight or 
passenger loading and unloading facilities or stations, parking 
facilities, passenger platforms, canopies, shelters, pedestrian 
overpasses or underpasses, paving, or landscaping.
    (xvi) Restoring wetlands, streams, riparian areas or other water 
bodies by removing, replacing, or modifying water control structures 
such as, but not limited to, dams, levees, dikes, ditches, culverts, 
pipes, drainage tiles, valves, gates, and fencing, to allow waters to 
flow into natural channels and floodplains and restore natural flow 
regimes to the extent practicable where valid existing rights or 
special use authorizations are not unilaterally altered or canceled. 
Examples include but are not limited to:
    (A) Repairing an existing water control structure that is no longer 
functioning properly with minimal dredging, excavation, or placement of 
fill, and does not involve releasing hazardous substances;
    (B) Installing a newly-designed structure that replaces an existing 
culvert to improve aquatic organism passage and prevent resource and 
property damage where the road or trail maintenance level does not 
change;
    (C) Removing a culvert and installing a bridge to improve aquatic 
and/or terrestrial organism passage or prevent resource or property 
damage where the road or trail maintenance level does not change; and
    (D) Removing a small earthen and rock fill dam with a low hazard 
potential classification that is no longer needed.
    (xvii) Acquisition, installation, modification, routine repair and 
replacement, and operation of utility (e.g., water, sewer, and 
electrical) and communication systems, mobile antennas, data processing 
cable and similar electronic equipment that use existing rights-of-way, 
easements, distribution systems, facilities, or previously disturbed 
land (REC required).
    (xviii) New construction or equipment installation or alterations 
(interior and exterior) to or construction of an addition to an 
existing structure that is like existing land use if the area to be 
disturbed has no more than five cumulative acres of new surface 
disturbance. The following conditions must be met:
    (A) The structure and proposed use are compatible with applicable 
Federal, Tribal, State, and local planning and zoning standards.
    (B) The site and scale of construction or improvement is consistent 
with those of existing, adjacent, or nearby buildings.
    (C) The construction or improvement will not result in uses that 
exceed existing support infrastructure capacities (roads, sewer, water, 
parking, etc.).
    (xix) Demolition of non-historic buildings, structures, or other 
improvements and repairs that result in disposal of debris therefrom, 
or removal of a part thereof for disposal, in accordance with 
applicable regulations, including those regulations applying to removal 
of asbestos containing materials, Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and 
lead based paint, and other special hazard items (REC required).
    (xx) Routine installation and use of radars, telemetry systems, 
communications equipment, and other essentially similar facilities and 
equipment within a launch facility, mobile platform, military 
installation, training area, or previously disturbed area that conform 
to current American National Standards Institute/Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (ANSI/IEEE) guidelines for maximum 
permissible exposure to electromagnetic fields.
    (xxi) Performing interior and exterior construction within the five 
-foot line of a building without changing the land use of the existing 
building.
    (xxii) Installing, operating, modifying, and routinely repairing 
and replacing utility and communications systems, data processing 
cable, and similar electronic equipment that use existing rights of 
way, easements, distribution systems, or facilities.
    (xxiii) Hosting or participating in public events (e.g., air shows, 
open houses, Earth Day events, and athletic events) where no permanent 
changes to existing infrastructure (e.g., road systems, parking, and 
sanitation systems) are required to accommodate all aspects of the 
event.
    (xxiv) Abatement of hazardous materials from existing facilities, 
including asbestos and lead-based paint, conducted in compliance with 
all applicable laws, regulations, and requirements established for the 
protection of human health and the environment. Examples include 
containment, removal, and disposal of lead-based paint or asbestos 
tiles and asbestos-containing materials from existing facilities, and 
remediation of hazardous materials in accordance with all applicable 
laws, regulations, and requirements as part of facility and space 
management activities.
    (xxv) Renovation, addition, repair, alteration, and demolition 
projects affecting buildings, roads, airfields, grounds, equipment, and 
other facilities, including subsequent disposal of debris, which may be 
contaminated with hazardous materials such as PCBs, lead, or asbestos. 
Hazardous materials shall be disposed of at approved sites in 
accordance with Federal, State, and local regulations.
    (3) Research, Development, and Science Activities including:
    (i) Research, development, testing, and evaluation in compliance 
with all applicable Federal, State, Tribal, or local laws or 
requirements and E.O.s. This includes the research, development, 
testing, and evaluation of scientific instruments proposed for use on 
spacecraft, aircraft (including unmanned aircraft systems), sounding 
rockets, balloons, laboratories, watercraft, or other outdoor 
activities.
    (ii) Use of small quantities of radioactive materials used for 
instrument detectors, calibration, and other purposes. Materials may be 
associated with the proposed use on spacecraft, aircraft (including 
unmanned aircraft systems), sounding

[[Page 39888]]

rockets, balloons, laboratories, watercraft, or other outdoor 
activities.
    (iii) Use of lasers for research and development, scientific 
instruments and measurements, and distance and ranging, where such use 
meets all applicable Federal, State, Tribal, or local laws or 
requirements and E.O.s. This includes lasers associated with 
spacecraft, aircraft (including unmanned aircraft systems), sounding 
rockets, balloons, laboratories, watercraft, or other outdoor 
activities.
    (iv) Use of non-space nuclear system payloads on various platforms 
(e.g., launch vehicle, sounding rocket, scientific balloon, and 
aircraft) (REC required).
    (v) Return of samples from solar system bodies (e.g., asteroids, 
comets, planets, dwarf planets, and planetary moons) to Earth when 
categorized as an Unrestricted Earth Return. NASA defines this activity 
as collecting extraterrestrial materials from solar system bodies, 
deemed by scientific opinion to have no indigenous life forms, and 
returning those samples to Earth (REC required).
    (vi) Outdoor tests and experiments for the development, quality 
assurance, or reliability of materials and equipment under controlled 
conditions. Covered actions include, but are not limited to, burn tests 
(such as tests of electric cable fire resistance or the combustion 
characteristics of fuels), impact tests (such as pneumatic ejector 
tests using earthen embankments or concrete slabs designated and 
routinely used for that purpose), or drop, puncture, water-immersion, 
or thermal tests. Covered actions would not involve source, special 
nuclear, or byproduct materials, except encapsulated sources 
manufactured to applicable standards that contain source, special 
nuclear, or byproduct materials may be used for nondestructive actions 
such as detector/sensor development and testing and first responder 
field training.
    (4) Real and Personal Property Activities including:
    (i) Acquisition, transfer, or disposal of any personal property, or 
personal property rights or interests.
    (ii) Granting or accepting easements, leases, licenses, rights-of-
entry, and permits to use NASA property, or any non-NASA property, for 
activities that would be categorically excluded in accordance with this 
section (REC required).
    (iii) Transfer or disposal of real property, property rights, or 
interests if a resulting change in use is a use that would be 
categorically excluded under this section (REC required).
    (iv) Transferring real property administrative control to another 
Federal agency, including the return of public domain lands to the 
Department of the Interior (DoI) or other Federal agencies, and 
reporting of property as excess and surplus to the General Services 
Administration (GSA) for disposal, when the agency receiving 
administrative control (or GSA, following receipt of a report of 
excess) shall complete any necessary NEPA review prior to any change in 
land use (REC required).
    (v) Acquisition of real property (including facilities) where the 
land use will not change substantially (REC required).
    (vi) Change in the facility status of real property assets (e.g., 
active or inactive).
    (vii) Reductions, realignments, or relocation of personnel into 
existing federally owned or commercially leased space that does not 
involve a substantial change affecting the supporting infrastructure 
(e.g., no increase in vehicular traffic beyond the capacity of the 
supporting road network to accommodate such an increase).
    (viii) Determination by NASA that NASA controlled personal 
property, including vessels and aircraft, is ``excess property'', as 
that term is defined in the Federal Property and Administrative 
Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. 102(3)), and any subsequent transfer of 
such property to another Federal agency's administrative control or 
conveyance of the United States' title in such property to a non-
Federal entity.
    (5) Aircraft and Airfield Activities including:
    (i) Periodic aircraft (including unmanned aircraft systems) flight 
activities, including training and research and development, which are 
routine and comply with applicable Federal, State, Tribal, or local 
laws or requirements, and E.O.s.
    (ii) Relocation of similar aircraft (including unmanned aircraft 
systems) not resulting in a substantial increase in total flying hours, 
number of aircraft operations, operational parameters (e.g., noise), or 
permanent personnel or logistics support requirements at the receiving 
installation (REC required).
    (iii) Supersonic flying aircraft operations over land and above 
30,000 feet Mean Sea Level, or over water and above 10,000 feet Mean 
Sea Level and more than 15 nautical miles from land (REC required).
    (h) Reliance. Reliance on categorical exclusion determination of 
other agencies. NASA may also rely on another agency's determination 
that a categorical exclusion applies to a particular proposed agency 
action if the agency action covered by that determination and NASA's 
proposed action are substantially the same, or if NASA's proposed 
action is a subset of the agency action covered by that determination. 
NASA will document its reliance on another agency's categorical 
exclusion determination in a REC.

Subpart 1216.4--Environmental Assessments

Sec.  1216.400  Preparation of environmental assessments.

    (a) Generally. If an action is subject to NEPA, and, unless NASA 
finds that the proposed action is excluded from having to prepare an 
environmental assessment or environmental impact statement pursuant to 
a categorical exclusion, or by another provision of law, NASA will 
prepare an environmental assessment with respect to a proposed agency 
action that does not have a reasonably foreseeable significant effect 
on the quality of the human environment, or if the significance of such 
effect is unknown.
    (b) Elements. For providing evidence and analysis for determining 
whether to prepare an environmental impact statement or a finding of no 
significant impact, environmental assessments will briefly discuss the:
    (1) Purpose and need for the proposed agency action.
    (2) Alternatives to the extent required by NEPA sec. 102(2)(H), 42 
U.S.C. 4332(2)(H).
    (3) The reasonably foreseeable effects of the proposed agency 
action for each of the alternatives considered.
    (c) Agency actions normally requiring an environmental assessment. 
The following classes of actions normally require environmental 
assessments, but likely do not require an environmental impact 
statement:
    (1) Altering the ongoing operations at a NASA Center where the 
significance of the environmental effect(s) is unknown.
    (2) Construction or modifications of facilities that represent a 
major change to an existing master plan and could result in a change in 
the environmental effect(s).
    (3) Actions that are expected to result in major changes to 
established land use that could potentially result in impacts to the 
environment.
    (4) Launching a spacecraft containing a space nuclear system. Space 
nuclear systems include radioisotope power systems, such as 
radioisotope thermoelectric generators and radioisotope heater units, 
and fission systems used for surface power and spacecraft propulsion.

[[Page 39889]]

    (d) Page limits. (1) The text of an environmental assessment will 
not exceed 75 pages, not including citations, appendices, explanatory 
maps, diagrams, graphs, tables, and other means of graphically 
displaying quantitative or geospatial information.
    (2) Appendices are to be used for voluminous materials, such as 
scientific tables, collections of data, statistical calculations, and 
the like, which substantiate the analysis provided in the environmental 
assessment. Appendices are not to be used to provide additional 
substantive analysis because that would circumvent congressionally 
mandated page limits.
    (3) Environmental assessments will be formatted for an 8.5''x11'' 
page with one-inch margins using a word processor with 12-point 
proportionally spaced font, single spaced. Footnotes may be in 10-point 
font. Such size restrictions do not apply to explanatory maps, 
diagrams, graphs, tables, and other means of graphically displaying 
quantitative or geospatial information, although pages containing such 
material do count towards the page limit when an item of graphical 
material is larger than 8.5''x11'', each such item will count as one 
page.
    (4) The breadth and depth of analysis in an environmental 
assessment will be tailored to ensure that the environmental analysis 
does not exceed this page limit. In this regard, as part of the 
finalization of the environmental assessment, a re-certification will 
be incorporated into the environmental assessment certifying that NASA 
has considered the factors mandated by NEPA; that the environmental 
assessment represents NASA's good-faith effort to prioritize 
documentation of the most important considerations required by the 
statute within the congressionally mandated page limits; that this 
prioritization reflects NASA's expert judgment; and that any 
considerations addressed briefly or left unaddressed were, in NASA's 
judgment, comparatively not of a substantive nature that meaningfully 
informed the consideration of environmental effects and the resulting 
decision on how to proceed.
    (e) Deadlines. NASA will complete the final environmental 
assessment not later than the date that is one year after the date on 
which NASA provides notice on a public-facing website that an 
environmental assessment will be prepared. The environmental assessment 
will be published, unless the deadline is extended, at the latest, on 
the day the deadline elapses in as substantially complete form as is 
possible.
    (f) Deadline extensions. If NASA determines it cannot meet the 
deadline prescribed by NEPA sec. 107(g)(1)(B), 42 U.S.C. 
4336a(g)(1)(B), it must consult with the non-Federal entity, if any, 
pursuant to NEPA sec. 107(g)(2), 42 U.S.C. 4336a(g)(2). After such 
consultation, if needed, it may establish a new deadline. Cause for 
establishing a new deadline is only established if the environmental 
assessment is so incomplete, at the time at which NASA determines it 
cannot meet the statutory deadline, that issuance would, in NASA's 
view, result in inadequate analysis. Such new deadline must provide 
only so much additional time as is necessary to complete such 
environmental assessment. The announcement of the new deadline will 
specify the reason why the environmental assessment was not able to be 
completed under the statutory deadline and whether the non-Federal 
entity, if any, consented to the new deadline.
    (g) Certification related to deadline. When the environmental 
assessment is published, a certification will be incorporated into the 
environmental assessment certifying that the resulting environmental 
assessment represents NASA's good-faith effort to fulfill NEPA's 
requirements within the congressional timeline; that such effort is 
substantially complete; that, in NASA's expert opinion, it has 
thoroughly considered the factors mandated by NEPA; and that, in NASA's 
judgement, the analysis contained therein is adequate to inform and 
reasonably explain NASA's final decision regarding the proposed Federal 
action.
    (h) Scope of analysis. (1) In preparing the environmental 
assessment, NASA will focus its analysis on whether the environmental 
effects of the action or project at hand are significant.
    (2) Similarly, NASA will document in the environmental assessment 
where and how it drew a reasonable and manageable line relating to its 
consideration of any environmental effects from the action or project 
at hand that extend outside the geographical territory of the project 
or might materialize later in time.

Sec.  1216.401  Findings of no significant impact.

    (a) NASA will prepare a finding of no significant impact if NASA 
determines, based on the environmental assessment, not to prepare an 
environmental impact statement because the proposed action or project 
at hand will not have significant effects. The finding of no 
significant impact will:
    (1) Include the environmental assessment or incorporate it by 
reference.
    (2) Document the reasons why NASA has determined that the selected 
alternative will not have a significant adverse effect on the quality 
of the human environment.
    (3) State the authority for any mitigation that NASA has assumed 
and any applicable monitoring or enforcement provisions. If NASA finds 
no significant effects based on mitigation, the mitigated finding of no 
significant impact will state any mitigation requirements enforceable 
by the agency or voluntary mitigation commitments that will be 
undertaken to avoid significant effects.
    (4) Identify any other environmental documents related to the 
finding of no significant impact.
    (5) State that an environmental impact statement will not be 
prepared, concluding the NEPA process for that action.
    (b) The agency will make the environmental assessment and finding 
of no significant impact available on a public-facing website.

Subpart 1216.5--Environmental Impact Statements

Sec.  1216.500  Preparation of environmental impact statements.

    (a) NASA shall prepare an environmental impact statement for 
actions that are likely to significantly impact the quality of the 
human environment, including actions for which an environmental 
assessment demonstrates that significant environmental impacts will 
potentially occur which will not be reduced or eliminated by changes to 
the proposed action or mitigation of its potentially significant 
environmental impacts. Whether an impact rises to the level of 
``significant'' is a matter of NASA's expert judgment. An environmental 
impact statement shall be prepared and published in accordance with 42 
U.S.C. 4332(C) and Sec.  1216.601.
    (b) NASA actions normally requiring an environmental impact 
statement include:
    (1) Development and operation of new NASA-developed launch vehicles 
or space transportation systems.
    (2) Management, including recovery, transport, and curation, of 
sample returns to Earth from solar system bodies (such as asteroids, 
comets, planets, dwarf planets, and planetary moons) that would receive 
a Restricted Earth Return categorization. NASA requires such a mission 
to include additional measures to ensure any

[[Page 39890]]

potential indigenous life form would be contained so it could not 
adversely impact humans or Earth's environment.
    (3) Substantial construction projects expected to result in 
significant adverse effect(s) on the quality of the human and natural 
environment when such construction and its effects are not within the 
scope of an existing master plan.
    (c) During the process of preparing an environmental impact 
statement, NASA:
    (1) Will obtain the comments of:
    (i) Any Federal agency that has jurisdiction by law or special 
expertise with respect to any environmental impact of the action or 
project at hand or is authorized to develop and enforce environmental 
standards that govern the action or project at hand.
    (ii) Appropriate State, Tribal, and local agencies that are 
authorized to develop and enforce environmental standards.
    (2) May request the comments of:
    (i) State, Tribal, or local governments that may be affected by the 
proposed action.
    (ii) Any agency that has requested it receive statements on actions 
of the kind proposed.
    (iii) The non-Federal project sponsor, if any.
    (iv) The public, including by affirmatively soliciting comments in 
a manner designed to inform those persons or organizations who may be 
interested in or affected by the proposed action.
    (d) The process of obtaining and requesting comments in paragraph 
(c) of this section may be undertaken at any time that is reasonable in 
the process of preparing the environmental impact statement. NASA will 
ensure that the process of obtaining and requesting comments, and 
NASA's analysis of and response to those comments, does not cause NASA 
to violate the congressionally mandated deadline for completion of an 
environmental impact statement.
    (e) NASA will address any substantive comments received consistent 
with paragraph (c) of this section in the environmental impact 
statement. Based on substantive comments and/or recommendations, NASA 
may consider such responses by:
    (1) Modifying alternatives, including the proposed action.
    (2) Developing and evaluating alternatives not previously 
considered.
    (3) Supplementing, improving, or modifying analyses, to include 
consideration of science or literature not previously considered.
    (4) Making factual corrections.
    (5) The agency may provide brief rationale for taking no action, 
such as:
    (i) The comment is outside the scope of what is being proposed.
    (ii) There is no cause-effect relationship between the actions the 
agency is proposing and the issue raised and/or recommendation made.
    (iii) The commenter misinterpreted the information provided.
    (iv) The recommendation made does not comply with applicable laws 
or regulations and/or is not technically or economically feasible to 
implement.
    (v) The comment was received outside the timeframe provided for 
such comments.

Sec.  1216.501  Purpose and need.

    The environmental impact statement will include the purpose and 
need for the proposed agency action based on NASA's statutory 
authority. When the proposed agency action concerns a non-Federal 
project sponsor, the purpose and need for the proposed agency action 
will also be informed by the goals of the non-Federal project sponsor.

Sec.  1216.502  Analysis within the environmental impact statement.

    (a) The environmental impact statement will include a detailed 
statement on:
    (1) A reasonable range of alternatives to the proposed agency 
action, including an analysis of any adverse environmental impacts of 
not implementing the proposed agency action in the case of a no action 
alternative, that are, in NASA's expert judgment, technically and 
economically feasible and meet the purpose and need of the proposal.
    (2) Reasonably foreseeable environmental effects of the proposed 
agency action and alternatives including the no action alternative.
    (3) Any reasonably foreseeable adverse environmental effects which 
cannot be avoided should the proposal be implemented.
    (4) The relationship between local short-term uses of the human 
environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term 
productivity.
    (5) Any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of Federal 
resources which would be involved in the proposed agency action should 
it be implemented.
    (6) Any means identified to mitigate adverse environmental effects 
of the proposed action. NASA is mindful in this respect that NEPA 
itself does not require or authorize NASA to impose any mitigation 
measures in environmental impact statements.
    (b) The environmental impact statement will define a scope of 
analysis.
    (1) In preparing the environmental impact statement, NASA will 
focus its analysis on whether the environmental effects of the action 
or project at hand are significant.
    (2) Similarly, NASA will document in the environmental impact 
statement where and how it drew a reasonable and manageable line 
relating to its consideration of any environmental effects from the 
action or project at hand that extend outside the geographical 
territory of the project or might materialize later in time.
    (c) Environmental impact statements will discuss effects in 
proportion to their significance. With respect to issues that are not 
of a substantive nature, lack a close causal connection, and do not 
meaningfully inform the consideration of environmental effects and the 
resulting decision on how to proceed, there will be no more than the 
brief possible discussion to explain why those issues are not 
substantive and therefore not worthy of any further analysis. 
Environmental impact statements will be analytic, concise, and no 
longer than necessary to comply with NEPA considering the 
congressionally mandated page limits and deadlines.

Sec.  1216.503  Page limits.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the text 
of an environmental impact statement will not exceed 150 pages, not 
including citations, appendices, explanatory maps, diagrams, graphs, 
tables, and other means of graphically displaying quantitative or 
geospatial information.
    (b) An environmental impact statement for a proposed agency action 
of extraordinary complexity is strictly prohibited from exceeding 300 
pages, not including any citations, appendices, explanatory maps, 
diagrams, graphs, tables, and other means of graphically displaying 
quantitative or geospatial information. NASA will determine at the 
earliest possible stage of preparation of an environmental impact 
statement whether the conditions for exceeding the page limit in 
paragraph (a) of this section are present.
    (c) Appendices are to be used for voluminous materials, such as 
scientific tables, collections of data, statistical calculations, and 
the like, which substantiate the analysis provided in the environmental 
impact statement. Appendices are not to be used to provide additional 
substantive analysis, because that would circumvent the congressionally 
mandated page limits.
    (d) Environmental impact statements will be prepared on 8.5'' x 
11'' paper with one-inch margins using a word processor with 12-point 
proportionally

[[Page 39891]]

spaced font, single spaced. Footnotes may be in 10-point font. Such 
size restrictions do not apply to explanatory maps, diagrams, graphs, 
tables, and other means of graphically displaying quantitative or 
geospatial information, although pages containing such material do 
count towards the page limit when an item of graphical material is 
larger than 8.5'' x 11'', each such item will count as one page.
    (e) The breadth and depth of analysis in an environmental impact 
statement will be tailored to ensure that the environmental impact 
statement does not exceed these page limits. In this regard, as part of 
the finalization of the environmental impact statement, a certification 
will be incorporated into the environmental impact statement certifying 
that NASA has considered the factors mandated by NEPA; that the 
environmental impact statement represents NASA's good-faith effort to 
prioritize documentation of the most important considerations required 
by the statute within the congressionally mandated page limits; that 
this prioritization reflects NASA's expert judgment; and that any 
considerations addressed briefly or left unaddressed were, in NASA's 
judgment, comparatively unimportant or frivolous.

Sec.  1216.504  Deadlines.

    (a) NASA will complete the final environmental impact statement not 
later than the date that is two years after the date on which NASA 
provides notice of intent on a public-facing website that an 
environmental impact statement will be prepared.
    (b) The environmental impact statement will be published (unless 
the deadline is extended) on the day the deadline elapses, in as 
substantially complete form as is possible.
    (c) If NASA determines it cannot meet the deadline prescribed by 
NEPA sec. 107(g)(1)(A), 42 U.S.C. 4336a(g)(1)(A), it must consult with 
the non-Federal project sponsor, if any, pursuant to NEPA sec. 
107(g)(2), 42 U.S.C. 4336a(g)(2). After such consultation, if needed, 
it may establish a new deadline. Cause for establishing a new deadline 
is only established if the environmental impact statement is so 
incomplete, at the time at which NASA determines it cannot meet the 
statutory deadline, that issuance would, in NASA's view, result in an 
inadequate analysis. Such new deadline must provide only so much 
additional time as is necessary to complete such environmental impact 
statement. The announcement of the new deadline will specify the reason 
why the environmental impact statement was not able to be completed 
under the statutory deadline and whether the non-Federal project 
sponsor, if any, consented to the new deadline.
    (d) When the environmental impact statement is published, a 
certification will be incorporated into the environmental impact 
statement certifying that the resulting environmental impact statement 
represents NASA's good-faith effort to fulfill NEPA's requirements 
within the congressional timeline; that such effort is substantially 
complete; and that, in NASA's expert opinion, it has thoroughly 
considered the factors mandated by NEPA; and that, in NASA's judgment, 
the analysis contained therein is adequate to inform and reasonably 
explain NASA's final decision regarding the proposed Federal action.

Sec.  1216.505  Publication of the environmental documents.

    NASA will publish the entire environmental impact statement and 
record of decision on a public-facing NASA website. During the process 
of preparing the environmental impact statement, NASA may publish such 
draft, pre-decisional materials as in its judgment may assist in 
fulfilling its responsibilities under NEPA and this subpart. NASA will 
also file with EPA as required under Sec.  1216.701.

Subpart 1216.6--Efficient Environmental Reviews

Sec.  1216.600  Lead, cooperating, and participating agencies.

    (a) NASA shall serve as the lead Federal agency for proposed 
actions which it proposes and over which no other Federal agency has 
jurisdiction by law to permit, approve, or authorize a required aspect 
of the proposed action. When serving as the lead agency, NASA is 
ultimately responsible for completing the NEPA process and will 
determine and document the scope of the project at hand. When a joint 
lead relationship is established pursuant to NEPA sec. 107(a)(1)(B), 42 
U.S.C. 4336a(a)(1)(B), NASA and the other joint lead agency or agencies 
are collectively responsible for completing the NEPA process.
    (b) If NASA shares responsibility with another Federal agency for 
NEPA compliance, NASA and the other agency shall, prior to issuing a 
notice to prepare an environmental assessment or environmental impact 
statement, determine by letter or memorandum, which agency shall be the 
lead agency based on consideration of the:
    (1) Magnitude of each agency's involvement.
    (2) Project approval or disapproval authority.
    (3) Expertise concerning the proposed action's environmental 
effects.
    (4) Duration of each agency's involvement.
    (5) Sequence of each agency's involvement.
    (c) In deciding under paragraph (b) of this section, NASA and other 
participating Federal agencies may agree to appoint such State, Tribal, 
or local agencies as joint lead agencies as the involved Federal 
agencies determine to be necessary.
    (d) When serving as the lead agency, NASA may, with respect to a 
proposed agency action, designate any Federal, State, Tribal, or local 
agency that has jurisdiction by law or special expertise with respect 
to any environmental impact involved in a proposal to serve as a 
cooperating agency. A cooperating agency may, not later than a date 
specified in the schedule established by NASA, submit comments on the 
environmental document being prepared for the proposed action.
    (e) NASA may request other Federal, State, Tribal, or local 
agencies to serve as participating agencies in the NEPA process where 
the Federal, State, Tribal, or local agency has particularized 
knowledge regarding an aspect of the project that will beneficially 
inform development of the environmental document and subsequent final 
agency decision making on the proposed action. A participating agency 
may, not later than a date specified in the schedule established by 
NASA, submit comments on the environmental document being prepared for 
the proposed action.
    (f) To the extent practicable, NASA will prepare a single, 
coordinated environmental document for NEPA actions with joint, 
cooperating, and participating agencies.

Sec.  1216.601  Public notice during the NEPA process.

    (a) For every environmental impact statement prepared by NASA, the 
following requirements, at a minimum, shall be implemented:
    (1) Publication of a notice of intent to prepare an environmental 
impact statement on a public-facing website. The notice of intent for 
an environmental impact statement will include a request for public 
comments on alternatives or effects and on relevant information, 
studies, or analyses with respect to the proposed agency action. In 
addition to a request for comment required for notices of intent for 
environmental impact statements, the notice of intent may include:

[[Page 39892]]

    (i) The purpose and need for the proposed action;
    (ii) A preliminary description of the proposed action and 
alternatives the environmental impact statement will consider;
    (iii) A brief summary of expected effects;
    (iv) Anticipated permits and other authorizations (i.e., 
anticipated related actions);
    (v) A schedule for the decision-making process;
    (vi) A description of the public scoping process, including any 
scoping meeting(s);
    (vii) Contact information for a person within NASA who can answer 
questions about the proposed action and the environmental impact 
statement; and
    (viii) Identification of any cooperating and participating agencies 
and any information that such agencies require in the notice to 
facilitate their decisions or authorizations.
    (2) Publication of a notice of availability and notice of 
additional public meetings, and/or additional request for comments 
(collectively, ``NOA''), as applicable, for the environmental impact 
statement on a public-facing website.
    (i) The NOA may solicit public comment on the sufficiency of the 
environmental analysis set forth in the environmental impact statement, 
and should announce the date, time, and location of any public 
meetings, either in-person or virtual, concerning the proposed action.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (3) Publication of the record of decision, if applicable, on a 
public-facing website.
    (b) For every environmental assessment prepared by NASA, the 
following requirements, at a minimum, shall be implemented:
    (1) NASA will provide notice on a public-facing website that an 
environmental assessment will be prepared.
    (2) NASA will make the environmental assessment and finding of no 
significant impact available on a public-facing website.
    (c) NASA may use an early and open process to determine the scope 
of issues for analysis in an environmental document, including 
identifying substantive issues that meaningfully inform the 
consideration of environmental effects and the resulting decision on 
how to proceed, eliminating from further study non-substantive issues, 
and determining whether connected actions should be addressed in the 
same environmental document. Scoping may begin as soon as practicable 
after the proposal for action is sufficiently developed for 
consideration. Scoping may include appropriate pre-application 
procedures or work conducted prior to publication of the notice of 
intent.

Sec.  1216.602  Programmatic environmental documents, tiering, 
reliance, and including material by reference.

    (a) For actions that require environmental assessments or 
environmental impact statements, NASA will undertake programmatic-level 
analysis for actions that are similar in nature, broad in scope, or 
likely to have similar environmental effects, as applicable. 
Programmatic NEPA analyses may take place in the form of an 
environmental assessment or environmental impact statement.
    (b) Tiering from previously prepared environmental impact 
statements or environmental assessments is appropriate when it would 
eliminate repetitive discussions of the same issues and exclude from 
consideration issues already decided. Tiering from a programmatic-level 
NEPA document is appropriate for site- or project-specific actions that 
are included within the scope of the programmatic-level analysis.
    (c) NASA may use programmatic environmental impact statements or 
environmental assessments without additional review for five years from 
the publication date unless there are substantial new circumstances or 
information about the significance of adverse effects that bear on the 
analysis
    (d) After five years, NASA may use programmatic environmental 
impact statements and environmental assessments after the analysis and 
assumptions in the environmental impact statement or environmental 
assessment are reevaluated to ensure reliance of the analysis is still 
valid. Reevaluation will be documented in a record of environmental 
consideration or memorandum to the file, including explanation for why 
the analysis remains valid considering any new and substantial 
information or circumstances.
    (e) NASA may rely on another Federal agency's environmental impact 
statement or environmental assessment, or portion thereof, if NASA 
conducts an independent review of the document and concludes that it 
meets the standards for an adequate environmental impact review, 
pursuant to this part and 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq. When relying on an 
environmental impact statement, environmental assessment, or portion 
thereof, NASA will cite, briefly describe the content and relevance to 
the environmental document, and may make modifications that are 
necessary to render the relied-upon document, or portion thereof, fit 
for fulfilling NEPA's analytic requirements for the action at hand.
    (1) If the actions covered by the original environmental impact 
statement or environmental assessment and the proposed action are 
substantially the same, NASA will republish the relied-upon statement 
or assessment.
    (2) If the actions are not substantially the same, NASA may modify 
the statement or assessment as necessary to render the statement fit 
for fulfilling NEPA's analytic requirements for the action at hand, and 
publish the relied-upon statement or assessment, as modified. Where 
appropriate, NASA may solicit comment to the extent that solicitation 
of comment will assist NASA in expeditiously adapting the relied-upon 
statement or assessment so that it is fit for NASA's purposes.
    (f) NASA shall include by reference material such as planning 
studies, analyses, or other relevant information, into an environmental 
impact statement or environmental assessment when the effect will be to 
cut down on bulk without impeding NASA and public review of the action. 
NASA shall cite the referenced material in the document and briefly 
describe its content. NASA shall not include material by reference 
unless it is reasonably available for inspection by potentially 
interested persons. NASA shall not include by reference material based 
on proprietary data that is not available for review and comment. NASA 
shall not use inclusion by reference to evade the statutory page 
limits.

Sec.  1216.603  Combining documents.

    NASA will combine, to the fullest extent practicable, any NEPA 
document with any other Federal agency NEPA document to reduce 
duplication and paperwork.

Sec.  1216.604  Supplements to environmental documents.

    (a) In cases where a major Federal action remains to occur, 
supplemental documentation may be required for previously prepared 
environmental assessments or environmental impact statements under the 
following circumstances:
    (1) If substantial changes are made to the proposed action that are 
relevant to environmental concerns.
    (2) There are significant new circumstances or information relevant 
to environmental concerns and bearing on the proposed action and its 
impacts.

[[Page 39893]]

    (3) NASA determines that the purposes of NEPA will be furthered by 
doing so.
    (b) The preparation of a supplemental environmental assessment or 
environmental impact statement shall be undertaken using the same 
procedural requirements as the initial document however, in the event a 
supplement to an environmental impact statement is required, public 
scoping shall not be required unless, at NASA's discretion, it is 
determined to be necessary or would otherwise further the purposes of 
NEPA.
    (c) When it is unclear if an environmental assessment or 
environmental impact statement supplement is required, NASA may prepare 
a written reevaluation.
    (1) The written reevaluation will discuss the circumstances that 
are pertinent to deciding whether to prepare a supplemental 
environmental assessment or environmental impact statement.
    (2) The written reevaluation will contain sufficient information 
for NASA to determine whether:
    (i) An existing environmental assessment or environmental impact 
statement should be supplemented;
    (ii) A new environmental assessment or environmental impact 
statement should be prepared; or
    (iii) No further NEPA documentation is required.
    (3) NASA shall make the determination and the related written 
reevaluation available to the public for information.
    (d) When applicable, NASA shall incorporate the determination and 
supporting written reevaluation into the administrative record related 
to the action that is the subject of the environmental assessment or 
environmental impact statement supplement or determination.

Sec.  1216.605  Integrity and completeness of information.

    (a) NASA will not undertake new scientific and technical research 
to inform its analyses unless it is essential to a reasoned choice 
among alternatives and the overall costs and time frame of such 
undertaking are not unreasonable. Rather, NASA will make use of 
reliable existing data and resources.
    (b) When NASA is evaluating an action's reasonably foreseeable 
effects on the human environment, and there is incomplete or 
unavailable information that cannot be obtained at a reasonable cost or 
the means to obtain it are unknown, NASA will make clear in the 
relevant NEPA document that such information is lacking.

Sec.  1216.606  Integrating NEPA with other environmental requirements.

    (a) To the fullest extent possible, NASA will prepare NEPA 
documents concurrently with and integrated with analyses and related 
surveys and studies required by other Federal statutes.
    (b) NASA will combine a NEPA document with any other agency 
document to reduce duplication and paperwork. Thus, NASA may combine a 
NEPA document with related plans, rules, or amendments as a single 
consolidated document.
    (c) If comments on a notice of intent or other aspects of a scoping 
process identify consultations, permits, or licenses necessary under 
other environmental laws, the NEPA document may contain a section 
briefly listing the applicable requirements and how NASA or a non-
Federal entity has or will meet them (e.g., permits applied for or 
received, consultations initiated or concluded).

Sec.  1216.607  Mitigation and monitoring.

    (a) When the analysis proceeds to an environmental assessment or 
environmental impact statement and mitigation measures are assumed for 
the purpose of avoiding or reducing the significance of environmental 
impacts, such mitigation measures will be identified in the finding of 
no significant impact or the record of decision.
    (b) NASA or the non-Federal project sponsor shall implement 
mitigation measures (including adaptive management strategies, where 
appropriate) consistent with applicable finding of no significant 
impact and/or record of decision and as required shall monitor their 
implementation and effectiveness.
    (c) The NASA responsible official or non-Federal project sponsor 
shall ensure that funding for such mitigation measures is included in 
the program or project budget.

Sec.  1216.608  Elimination of duplication with State, Tribal, and 
local procedures.

    (a) NASA will cooperate with State, Tribal, and local agencies that 
are responsible for preparing environmental documents.
    (b) To the fullest extent practicable unless specifically 
prohibited by law, NASA will cooperate with State, Tribal, and local 
agencies to reduce duplication between NEPA and State, Tribal, and 
local requirements, including through use of studies, analysis, and 
decisions developed by State, Tribal, or local agencies. Such 
cooperation may include:
    (1) Joint planning processes.
    (2) Joint environmental research and studies.
    (3) Joint public meetings (except where otherwise provided by 
statute).
    (4) Joint environmental documents.

Sec.  1216.609  Emergencies.

    When NASA determines that emergency circumstances exist which make 
it necessary to take immediate response and/or recovery action(s) 
before preparing a NEPA analysis, then the following provisions apply:
    (a) NASA may undertake immediate emergency response and/or recovery 
action(s) necessary to protect life, property, or important natural, 
cultural, or historic resources. When taking such action(s), NASA 
shall, to the extent practicable, mitigate reasonably foreseeable 
adverse environmental impacts.
    (b) If NASA proposes emergency response and/or recovery actions 
that will continue beyond those needed to immediately protect life, 
property, and important natural, cultural, or historic resources, NASA 
shall determine the appropriate level of NEPA compliance.
    (c) If continuation of the emergency actions will reasonably result 
in significant environmental impacts, NASA shall notify CEQ about 
alternative arrangements for compliance.

Sec.  1216.610  Classified actions.

    (a) The classified status of a proposed action does not relieve 
NASA of the requirement to assess, document, and consider the 
environmental impacts of the proposed action.
    (b) When classified information can reasonably be separated from 
other information and a meaningful environmental analysis can be 
produced, unclassified documents will be prepared and processed in 
accordance with this section. Classified portions will be kept separate 
and provided to properly cleared reviewers and decision makers in the 
form of a properly classified document that meets the requirements of 
this section to the extent permitted, given such classification.

Subpart 1216.7--Agency Decision Making

Sec.  1216.700  Decision documents.

    At the time of its decision on its proposed action, NASA may 
prepare and timely publish a concise public decision document, 
notifying the public that the decision maker has certified that NASA 
has considered all relevant information raised in the NEPA process and 
that the NEPA process has closed,

[[Page 39894]]

pursuant to Sec. Sec.  1216.400(e) and 1216.504.

Sec.  1216.701  Filing requirements.

    NASA will file environmental impact statements together with 
comments and responses with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
for publication in the Federal Register.

Subpart 1216.8--Procedures for Non-Federal Project Sponsor-Prepared 
NEPA Documents

Sec.  1216.800  Procedures for non-Federal project sponsor-prepared 
environmental documents.

    (a) A non-Federal project sponsor may request to prepare an 
environmental assessment or environmental impact statement. If the 
request is approved, the non-Federal project sponsor shall undertake 
preparation of the environmental document under the supervision of 
NASA.
    (b) The non-Federal project sponsor shall ensure that the 
environmental document's analysis is sufficient to meet the 
requirements of NEPA and this part, including the potential impacts on 
the natural and human environments and sufficient information that 
complies with all applicable Federal, Tribal, and State requirements 
for the protection of the environment.
    (c) The non-Federal project sponsor shall coordinate with NASA on 
communications to other Federal, State, local, and Tribal agencies with 
respect to permits, licenses, consultations, approvals, and 
authorizations associated with the proposed action.
    (d) A non-Federal project sponsor must include a lifecycle analysis 
of the proposed action and alternatives (i.e., construction, operation, 
and decommissioning of the proposed project).
    (e) NASA must approve the scope of analysis (e.g., natural, 
cultural, and socioeconomic resources; and environmental media) 
required for completion of the appropriate environmental document. NASA 
will provide appropriate guidance and assist in environmental document 
preparation, to the extent that NASA's resources and policy priorities 
admit. NASA will work with the non-Federal project sponsor to define 
the purpose and need, and, when appropriate, to develop a reasonable 
range of alternatives to meet that purpose and need.
    (f) NASA will decide whether an environmental assessment or 
environmental impact statement requires public engagement. If required, 
the non-Federal project sponsor shall coordinate with NASA in all 
aspects of the public engagement process, including, but not limited 
to, the publication of notices (intent, public meetings, availability 
of environmental documents) in publicly available media (i.e., local, 
regional, national news outlets of broad circulation; social media 
outlets; public-facing websites); the preparation of a public 
engagement plan; the preparation of all public meeting materials or 
media packages; and any other materials that support public engagement 
in the NEPA process.
    (g) The non-Federal project sponsor shall allow the participation 
of joint, cooperating, or participating agencies, as appropriate.
    (h) The non-Federal project sponsor may prepare a ``confidential 
business information'' (CBI) or ``proprietary information'' annex to 
the environmental document which it prepares. Upon review and approval 
by NASA, this information may be withheld from public dissemination, 
but the CBI/proprietary information annex will be incorporated as part 
of the final administrative record.
    (i) The non-Federal project sponsor shall meet all requirements of 
this part, including the timeframes for completion of the environmental 
document as set forth in Sec. Sec.  1216.400(e) and 1216.504(a). Major 
changes to the schedule or related matters will be documented through 
written correspondence.
    (j) NASA shall assist in the preparation of the non-Federal project 
sponsor's environmental document, independently evaluate the 
environmental document, and be responsible for the environmental 
document's analytical and legal sufficiency. NASA shall be responsible 
for issuing any record of decision or finding of no significant impact 
as may be required.
    (k) Non-Federal project sponsors intending to pay a fee for an 
expedited environmental impact statement or environmental assessment 
deadline pursuant to section 112 of NEPA for which NASA would be the 
lead agency should consult with NASA before submitting a request to the 
CEQ. NASA will use such consultation to assist the non-Federal project 
sponsor in providing an accurate description of the project as it 
relates to the anticipated environmental impact statement or 
environmental assessment-associated government costs and understanding 
the anticipated scope of the environmental review including whether to 
prepare an environmental assessment or an environmental impact 
statement.

Subpart 1216.9--Definitions

Sec.  1216.900  Definitions.

    As used in this part, terms have the meanings provided in NEPA sec. 
111, 42 U.S.C. 4336e. In addition:
    (a) Authorization means any license, permit, approval, finding, 
determination, or other administrative decision issued by an agency 
that is required or authorized under Federal law to implement a 
proposed action.
    (b) Connected action means a separate Federal action within the 
authority of NASA that is closely related to the proposed agency action 
and should be addressed in a single environmental document because the 
proposed agency action:
    (1) Automatically triggers the separate Federal action, which 
independently would require the preparation of additional environmental 
documents.
    (2) Cannot proceed unless the separate Federal action is taken 
previously or simultaneously.
    (3) Is an interdependent part of a larger Federal action that 
includes a separate Federal action, which mutually depends on the 
larger Federal action for their justification.
    (c) Council or CEQ means the Council on Environmental Quality.
    (d) Effects or impacts means changes to the human environment from 
the proposed action or alternatives that are reasonably foreseeable and 
have a reasonably close geographic and temporal causal relationship to 
the proposed action or alternatives.
    (1) Effects include ecological (e.g., effects on natural resources 
and on the components, structures, and functioning of affected 
ecosystems), aesthetic, historic, cultural, economic (e.g., effects on 
employment), social, or health effects. Effects appropriate for 
analysis under NEPA may be either beneficial or adverse, or both, with 
respect to these values.
    (2) A ``but for'' causal relationship is insufficient to make an 
agency responsible for a particular effect under NEPA. Effects should 
generally not be considered if they are remote in time, geographically 
remote, or the product of a lengthy causal chain. Effects do not 
include those effects that the agency has no ability to prevent due to 
the limits of its regulatory authority, or that would occur regardless 
of the proposed action, or that would need to be initiated by a third 
party.
    (e) Human environment means comprehensively the natural and 
physical environment and the relationship of present and future 
generations with that environment. (See

[[Page 39895]]

also the definition of effects in paragraph (d) of this section.)
    (f) Jurisdiction by law means agency authority to approve, veto, or 
finance all or part of the proposal.
    (g) Major Federal action, as defined in 42 U.S.C. 4336e (10):
    (1) In general. The term major Federal action means an action that 
the agency carrying out such action determines is subject to 
substantial Federal control and responsibility.
    (2) Exclusion. the term major Federal action does not include:
    (i) A non-Federal action--
    (A) With no or minimal Federal funding; or
    (B) With no or minimal Federal involvement where a Federal agency 
cannot control the outcome of the project;
    (ii) Funding assistance solely in the form of general revenue 
sharing funds which do not provide Federal agency compliance or 
enforcement responsibility over the subsequent use of such funds;
    (iii) Loans, loan guarantees, or other forms of financial 
assistance where a Federal agency does not exercise sufficient control 
and responsibility over the subsequent use of such financial assistance 
or the effect of the action;
    (iv) Business loan guarantees provided by the Small Business 
Administration pursuant to section 7(a) or (b) and of the Small 
Business Act (U.S.C. 636(a)), or title V of the Small Business 
Investment Act of 1958 (15 U.S.C. 695 et seq.);
    (v) Bringing judicial or administrative civil or criminal 
enforcement actions;
    (vi) Extraterritorial activities or decisions, which means agency 
activities or decisions with effects located entirely outside of the 
jurisdiction of the United States; or
    (vii) Activities or decisions that are non-discretionary and made 
in accordance with the agency's statutory authority.
    (h) Mitigation means measures that avoid, minimize, or compensate 
for effects caused by a proposed action or alternatives as described in 
an environmental document or record of decision and that have a nexus 
to those effects. While NEPA requires consideration of mitigation, it 
does not mandate the form or assumption of any mitigation. Mitigation 
includes:
    (1) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action 
or parts of an action.
    (2) Minimizing effects by limiting the degree or magnitude of the 
action and its implementation.
    (3) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or 
restoring the affected environment.
    (4) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation 
and maintenance operations during the life of the action.
    (5) Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing 
substitute resources or environments.
    (i) NASA Responsible Official is the NASA official who will ensure 
that planning and decision-making for each proposed Agency action 
complies with the regulations in this subpart and with Agency NEPA 
policy and guidance.
    (j) NEPA means the National Environmental Policy Act, as amended 
(42 U.S.C. 4321, et seq.).
    (k) Notice of intent means a public notice that an agency will 
prepare an environmental document and consider public comments.
    (l) Participating agency means a Federal, State, Tribal, or local 
agency participating in an environmental review or authorization of an 
action.
    (m) Reasonable alternatives mean a reasonable range of alternatives 
that are technically and economically feasible, meet the purpose and 
need for the proposed action, and, where applicable, meet the goals of 
the agency or the non-Federal project sponsor.
    (n) Reasonably foreseeable means sufficiently likely to occur such 
that a person of ordinary prudence would take it into account in 
reaching a decision.
    (o) Record of environmental consideration is a brief document that 
is used to describe a proposed action and explain why further 
environmental analysis is or is not required.
    (p) Scope consists of the range of actions, alternatives, and 
effects to be considered in an environmental document. The scope of a 
NEPA document may depend on its relationships to other NEPA documents.
    (q) Tiering refers to the coverage of general matters in broader 
environmental impact statements or environmental assessments (such as 
national program or policy statements) with subsequent narrower 
statements or environmental analyses (such as regional or basin-wide 
program statements or ultimately site-specific statements) 
incorporating by reference the general discussion and concentrating 
solely on the issues specific to the statement subsequently prepared.

Subpart 1216.10--Severability

Sec.  1216.1000  Severability.

    The subparts of this part are separate and severable from one 
another. If any subpart or portion therein is stayed or determined to 
be invalid, or the applicability of any subpart or portion therein to 
any person or entity is held invalid, it is NASA's intention that the 
validity of the remainder of the subparts will not be affected, with 
the remaining subparts or portions therein to continue in effect.

[FR Doc. 2026-13245 Filed 6-30-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE P