Comte (Isidore Auguste Marie François Xavier), French philosopher,
mathematician and reformer, b. at Montpelier, 12 Jan. 1798. Educated at
Paris in the Polytechnic School, where he distinguished himself by his
mathematical talent. In 1817 he made the acquaintance of St. Simon,
agreeing with him as to the necessity of a Social renovation based
upon a mental revolution. On the death of St. Simon ('25) Comte
devoted himself to the elaboration of an original system of scientific
thought, which, in the opinion of some able judges, entitles him to
be called the Bacon of the nineteenth century. Mill speaks of him as
the superior of Descartes and Leibniz. In '25 he married, but the
union proved unhappy. In the following year he lectured, but broke
down under an attack of brain fever, which occasioned his detention
in an asylum. He speedily recovered, and in '28 resumed his lectures,
which were attended by men like Humboldt, Ducrotay, Broussais, Carnot,
etc. In '30 he put forward the first volumes of his Course of Positive
Philosophy, which in '42 was completed by the publication of the sixth
volume. A condensed English version of this work was made by Harriet
Martineau, '53. In '45 Comte formed a passionate Platonic attachement
to Mme. Clotilde de Vaux, who died in the following year, having
profoundely influenced Comte's life. In consequence of his opinions,
he lost his professorship, and was supported by his disciples--Mill,
Molesworth and Grote, in England, assisting. Among other works, Comte
published A General View of Positivism, '48, translated by Dr. Bridges,
'65; A System of Positive Polity, '51, translated by Drs. Bridges,
Beesley, F. Harrison, etc., '75-79; and A Positive Catechism, '54,
translated by Dr. Congreve, '58. He also wrote on Positive Logic,
which he intended to follow with Positive Morality and Positive
Industrialism. Comte was a profound and suggestive thinker. He
resolutely sets aside all theology and metaphysics, coordinates
the sciences and substitutes the service of man for the worship of
God. Mr. J. Cotter Morison says "He belonged to that small class
of rare minds, whose errors are often more valuable and stimulating
than other men's truths." He died of cancer in the stomach at Paris,
5 Sept. 1857.
