Eichhorn (Johann Gottfried), German Orientalist and rationalist, b. 16
Oct. 1752, became Professor of Oriental Literature and afterwards
Professor of Theology at Gottingen. He published Introductions to
the Old and New Testaments and A Commentary on the Apocalypse, in
which his criticism tends to uproot belief in the Bible as a divine
revelation. He lectured every day for fifty-two years. Died 25 June,
1827.

"Elborch (Conrad von)," the pseudonym of a living learned Dutch writer,
whose position does not permit him to reveal his true name. Born
14 Jan. 1865, he has contributed to De Dageraad (The Daybreak),
under various pen-names, as "Fra Diavolo," "Denis Bontemps," "J. Van
den Ende," etc. He has given, in '88, a translation of the rare and
famous Latin treatise, De Tribus Impostoribus (On Three Impostors)
[Jesus, Moses, and Muhammad], with an important bibliographic and
historical introduction.

"Eliot (George)," the pen-name of Mary Ann Lewes (née Evans) one of
the greatest novelists of the century, b. at Arbury Farm, near Griff,
Warwickshire, 22 Nov. 1819. In '41 the family removed to Foleshill,
near Coventry. Here she made the friendship of the household of
Charles Bray, and changed her views from Evangelical Christianity
to philosophical scepticism. Influenced by The Inquiry into the
Origin of Christianity, by C. C. Hennell (Bray's brother-in-law),
she made an analysis of that work. Her first literary venture was
translating Strauss' Leben Jesu, published in 1846. After the death
of her father ('49) she travelled with the Brays upon the Continent,
and upon her return assisted Dr. Chapman in the editorship of the
Westminster Review, to which she contributed several articles. She
translated Feuerbach's Essence of Christianity, '54, the only work
published with her real name, and also translated from Spinoza's
Ethics. Introduced by Herbert Spencer to George Henry Lewes, she
linked her life with his in defiance of the conventions of society,
July, '54. Both were poor, but by his advice she turned to fiction,
in which she soon achieved success. Her Scenes of Clerical Life, Adam
Bede, Mill on the Floss, Silas Marner, Romola, Felix Holt, Middlemarch,
Daniel Deronda, and Theophrastus Such have become classics. As a poet,
"George Eliot" does not rank so high, but her little piece, "Oh,
may I join the choir invisible," well expresses the emotion of the
Religion of Humanity, and her Spanish Gipsy she allowed was "a mass
of Positivism." Lewes died in 1878, and within two years she married
his friend, J. W. Cross. Her new happiness was short-lived. She died
22 Dec. 1880, and is buried with Lewes at Highgate.
