Ensor (George), an Irish writer, b. Loughgall, 1769. Educated at
Trinity College; he became B.A. 1790. He travelled largely, and was
a friend of liberty in every country. Besides other political works
he published, The Independent Man, 1806; On National Government,
1810; A Review of the Miracles, Prophecies and Mysteries of the
Old and New Testaments, first printed as Janus on Sion, 1816, and
republished 1835; and Natural Theology Examined, 1836, the last being
republished in The Library of Reason. Bentham described him as clever
but impracticable. Died Ardress, Co. Armagh, 3 Dec. 1843.

Epicurus, Greek philosopher, b. Samos, B.C. 342. He repaired to
Athens, B.C. 323. Influenced by the works of Demokritos, he occupied
himself with philosophy. He purchased a garden in Athens, in which he
established his school. Although much calumniated, he is now admitted
to have been a man of blameless life. According to Cicero, he had no
belief in the gods, but did not attack their existence, in order not
to offend the prejudices of the Athenians. In physics he adopted the
atomic theory, and denied immortality. He taught that pleasure is the
sovereign good; but by pleasure he meant no transient sensation, but
permanent tranquility of mind. He wrote largely, but his works are
lost. His principles are expounded in the great poem of Lucretius,
De Rerum Natura. Died B.C. 270, leaving many followers.

"Erdan (Alexandre)," the pen-name of Alexandre Andre Jacob, a French
writer, b. Angles 1826. He was the natural son of a distinguished
prelate. Educated at Saint Sulpice for the Church, he read Proudhon,
and refused to take holy orders. He became a journalist and an advocate
of phonography. His work, La France Mystique (1855), in which he
gives an account of French religious eccentricities, was condemned
for its scepticism which appears on every page. Sentenced to a year's
imprisonment and a fine of three thousand francs, he took refuge in
Italy. Died at Frascati, near Rome, 24 Sept. 1878.
