Foote (George William), writer and orator, b. Plymouth, 11
Jan. 1850. Was "converted" in youth, but became a Freethinker by
reading and independent thought. Came to London in 1868, and was soon a
leading member of the Young Men's Secular Association. He taught in the
Hall of Science Sunday School, and became secretary of the Republican
League. Devoting his time to propagating his principles, he wrote
in the Secular Chronicle and National Reformer, and in '76 started
the Secularist in conjunction with Mr. G. J. Holyoake, and after
the ninth number conducting it alone. This afterwards merged in the
Secular Review. In '79 Mr. Foote edited the Liberal, and in Sept. '81,
started the Freethinker, which he still edits. In the following year
a prosecution was commenced by the Public Prosecutor, who attempted
to connect Mr. Bradlaugh with it. Undaunted, Mr. Foote issued a
Christmas number with an illustrated "Comic Life of Christ." For
this a prosecution was started by the City authorities against him
and his publisher and printer, and the trial came on first in March,
'83. The jury disagreed, but Judge North refused to discharge the
prisoners, and they were tried again on the 5th March; Judge North
directing that a verdict of guilty must be returned, and sentencing
Mr. Foote to one year's imprisonment as an ordinary criminal subject
to the same "discipline" as burglars. "I thank you, my lord; your
sentence is worthy of your creed," he remarked. On 24 April, '83,
Mr. Foote was brought from prison before Lord Coleridge and a special
jury on the first charge, and after a splendid defence, upon which
he was highly complimented by the judge, the jury disagreed. He has
debated with Dr. McCann, Rev. A. J. Harrison, the Rev. W. Howard,
the Rev. H. Chapman, and others. Mr. Foote has written much,
and lectures continually. Among his works we mention Heroes and
Martyrs of Freethought (1876); God, the Soul, and a Future State;
Secularism the True Philosophy of Life (1879); Atheism and Morality;
The Futility of Prayer; Bible Romances; Death's Test, afterwards
enlarged into Infidel Death-Beds; The God Christians Swear by; Was
Jesus Insane? Blasphemy No Crime; Arrows of Freethought; Prisoner
for Blasphemy (1884); Letters to Jesus Christ; What Was Christ? Bible
Heroes; and has edited The Bible Hand-book with Mr. W. P. Ball, and
the Jewish Life of Christ with the present writer, in conjunction
with whom he has written The Crimes of Christianity. From 1883-87
he edited Progress, in which appeared many important articles from
his pen. Mr. Foote is President of the London Secular Federation,
and a Vice-President of the National Secular Society.
