Garibaldi (Guiseppe), Italian patriot and general, b. Nice, 4
July, 1807. His father, a small shipmaster, hoped he would become a
priest. Young Garibaldi objected, preferring a sailor's life. A trip to
Rome made him long to free his country. He joined Mazzini's movement,
"Young Italy," and being implicated in the Genoese revolt of '33,
he fled at risk of his life to Marseilles, where he learnt he was
sentenced to death. He went to South America and fought on behalf of
the republic of Uruguay. Here he met Anita Rivera, his beautiful and
brave wife, who accompanied him in numerous adventures. Returning to
Italy he fought against the Austrians in '48, and next year was the
soul of resistance to the French troops, who came to restore Papal
authority. Garibaldi had to retire; his wife died, and he escaped
with difficulty to Genoa, whence he went to New York, working for
an Italian soap and candlemaker at Staten Island. In '54 he returned
and bought a farm on the isle of Caprera. In '59 he again fought the
Austrians, and in May, '60, landed at Marsala, Sicily, took Palermo,
and drove Francis II. from Naples. Though a Republican he saluted
Victor Emanuel as King of Italy. Vexed by the cessation of Nice to
France, he marched to Rome, but was wounded by Victor Emanuel's
troops, and taken prisoner to Varignaro. Here he wrote his Rule
of the Monk, a work exhibiting his love of liberty and hatred of
the priesthood. In '64 he visited England, and was enthusiastically
received. In '67 he again took part in an attempt to free Rome from
the Papal government. In '71 he placed his sword at the service of
the French Republic, and the only standard taken from the Germans was
captured by his men. Elected Member of the Italian Parliament in his
later years he did much to improve the city of Rome. In one of his
laconic letters of '80, he says "Dear Friend,--Man has created God,
not God man,--Yours ever, Garibaldi." He died 2 June, '82, and directed
in his will that he should be cremated without any religious ceremony.
