Huxley (Thomas Henry), LL.D., Ph.D., F.R.S., b. Ealing, 4 May, 1825. He
studied medicine, and in '46 took M.R.C.S., and was appointed assistant
naval surgeon. His cruises afforded opportunities for his studies of
natural history. In '51 he was elected Fellow of the Royal Society, and
in '54 was made Professor at the School of Mines. In '60 he lectured on
"The Relation of Man to the Lower Animals," and afterwards published
Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature (1863). In addition to numerous
scientific works, Professor Huxley has written numerous forcible
articles, addresses, etc., collected in Lay Sermons, '70; Critiques
and Addresses, '73; and American Addresses, '79. A vigorous writer,
his Hume in the "English Men of Letters" series is a model of clear
exposition. In his controversies with Mr. Gladstone, in his articles
on the Evolution of Theology, and in his recent polemic with the
Rev. Mr. Wace in the Nineteenth Century, Professor Huxley shows all
his freshness, and proves himself as ready in demolishing theological
fictions as in demonstrating scientific facts. He states as his own
life aims "The popularising of science and untiring opposition to
that ecclesiastical spirit, that clericalism, which in England,
as everywhere else, and to whatever denomination it may belong,
is the deadly enemy of science."

Hypatia, Pagan philosopher and martyr, b. Alexandria early in
the second half of the fourth century. She became a distinguished
lecturer and head of the Neo-Platonic school (c. 400). The charms of
her eloquence brought many disciples. By a Christian mob, incited by
St. Cyril, she was in Lent 415 torn from her chariot, stripped naked,
cut with oyster-shells and finally burnt piecemeal. This true story
of Christian persecution has been disguised into a legend related of
St. Catherine in the Roman breviary (Nov. 25).

Ibn Bajjat. See Avenpace.

Ibn Massara. See Massara in Supplement.

Ibn Rushd. See Averroes.

Ibn Sabîn. See Sabin.

Ibn Sina. See Avicenna.

Ibn Tofail. See Abu Bakr.
