Besant (Annie) née Wood. B. London, 1 Oct. 1847. Educated in
Evangelicalism by Miss Marryat, sister of novelist, but turned
to the High Church by reading Pusey and others. In "Holy Week"
of 1866 she resolved to write the story of the week from the
gospel. Their contradictions startled her but she regarded her doubts
as sin. In Dec. '67 she married the Rev. F. Besant, and read and
wrote extensively. The torment a child underwent in whooping-cough
caused doubts as to the goodness of God. A study of Greg's Creed
of Christendom and Arnold's Literature and Dogma increased her
scepticism. She became acquainted with the Rev. C. Voysey and Thomas
Scott, for whom she wrote an Essay on the Deity of Jesus of Nazareth,
"by the wife of a beneficed clergyman." This led to her husband
insisting on her taking communion or leaving. She chose the latter
course, taking by agreement her daughter with her. Thrown on her own
resources, she wrote further tracts for Mr. Scott, reprinted in My Path
to Atheism ('77). Joined the National Secular Society, and in '74 wrote
in the National Reformer over the signature of "Ajax." Next year she
took to the platform and being naturally eloquent soon won her way to
the front rank as a Freethought lecturess, and became joint editor
of the National Reformer. Some lectures on the French Revolution
were republished in book form. In April, '77, she was arrested
with Mr. Bradlaugh for publishing the Fruits of Philosophy. After a
brilliant defence, the jury exonerated the defendants from any corrupt
motives, and although they were sentenced the indictment was quashed
in Feb. '78, and the case was not renewed. In May, '78, a petition
in Chancery was presented to deprive Mrs. Besant of her child on the
ground of her Atheistic and Malthusian views. Sir G. Jessell granted
the petition. In '80 Mrs. Besant matriculated at the London University
and took 1st B.Sc. with honors in '82. She has debated much and issued
many pamphlets to be found in Theological Essays and Debates. She
wrote the second part of the Freethinkers' Text Book dealing with
Christian evidence; has written on the Sins of the Church, 1886, and
the Evolution of Society. She has translated Jules Soury's Religion
of Israel, and Jesus of the Gospels; Dr. L. Büchner on the Influence
of Heredity and Mind in Animals, and from the fifteenth edition of
Force and Matter. From '83 to '88 she edited Our Corner, and since
'85 has given much time to Socialist propaganda, and has written many
Socialist pamphlets. In Dec. '88, Mrs. Besant was elected a member
of the London School Board.
