FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 115
115. Record of Meeting
Date: 1967-01-21
Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Chequers Trip, Box 8.

RECORD OF MEETING AT CHEQUERS ON SATURDAY, 21ST JANUARY, 1967

PRESENT Chancellor of the Exchequer Mr. Secretary Fowler Mr. Deming Mr. Bator Sir William Armstrong Sir Denis Rickett Mr. Ryrie (Secretary)

Meeting of Finance Ministers on Monetary Policies

Mr. Secretary Fowler said that in his view the object of the meeting should be to make it easier for those responsible for monetary policies in the leading countries to understand how their policies affected others. It was important to press the Germans to take more fiscal action so as to enable them to adopt easier monetary policies. He did not think that it would be possible for those present to commit themselves to specific courses of action, but an effort should be made to reach a consensus on the general direction which policy should take.

The Chancellor of the Exchequer saw the object of the meeting as being to put some pressure behind Central Banks where necessary to take action to lower interest rates and Governments where appropriate to take action which would make it easier for Central Banks to lower interest rates.

An American draft communique was considered. The Chancellor of the Exchequer thanked Mr. Fowler for providing this draft and said that he and his officials would consider it further.

[Here follows discussion of the Common Market; see Foreign Relations, 1964-1968, volume XIII, pages 529-530.]

International Liquidity

The Chancellor feared that a failure to reach agreement in the discussions on international liquidity was a real possibility and a question might arise whether all the other Continental countries would be willing to enter an agreement without France. He thought that the French Government would go on using international monetary questions for political purposes against the United States. He interpreted their recent moves on gold as motivated partly by fear that agreement would be reached without them on a new form of international reserve asset.

Mr. Secretary Fowler expressed his agreement and said it remained to be seen how far the French would go to obstruct progress. From a certain point obstruction could be counterproductive from their point of view. He was firm of the opinion himself that the only course was to press ahead with the negotiations and not allow ourselves to be diverted by the French tactics.

It was the opinion of both sides that the recent Belgian proposal, purporting to be a possible basis for a compromise between the French and the "Anglo Saxon" points of view, could not be taken seriously.
