FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 147
147. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson
Date: 1967-10-19
SUBJECT: Contingency Support For Sterling
Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Monetary Crisis, November 1968, Cables and Memos, Vol.

At Tab A is Joe Fowler's memo recommending an increase of $100 million in the funds he has available for market operations to support sterling.

What it comes down to is this.

Today's increase in the discount rate is part of the last ditch British effort to hold the sterling rate. As you know, they moved strongly last year to support the pound: they deflated their economy, cut down foreign commitments and borrowed heavily abroad.

The program worked well through the first quarter of this year. They were able to pay off more than $1 billion in debt. Then they ran into bad luck: -disappointing exports, largely because of the recession on the continent; -the Middle East crisis and the closure of the Canal; -rising interest rates elsewhere while theirs were going down.

They began to lose reserves and had to draw heavily on their line of short term credits.

The increase in the bank rate is designed to draw funds back to London. The market's initial reaction was slightly disappointing because some expected a higher increase in the rate. But sterling is holding steady because of support operations.

Through selective and carefully timed actions, we have operated successfully in the market in the past to keep the rate from worsening on bad news or to strengthen it on good news. We do so at our own discretion but in cooperation with the British.

We now have $160 million available for this purpose. Fowler recommends that you authorize him to make $100 million more available out of the Exchange Stabilization Fund. This would give the necessary leeway to have a maximum impact on the market-either to continue defensive operations or to take advantage of favorable opportunities.

These funds are guaranteed against loss from devaluation. There is no balance of payments effect. If the funds are used, it would in effect amount to an increase in our lending to the U.K.

This is a contingency investment that could be used very effectively to support sterling. I believe Fowler's proposal makes sense. Deming, Okun, Daane and Fried who have gone into it carefully concur in the recommendation.

Your decision is needed as soon as possible so that our people in the exchange market will know how much ammunition they have and plan their operations accordingly from tomorrow on.

Approve No See me

Attachment Washington, October 19, 1967. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Fowler to President Johnson SUBJECT Additional Assistance to the U. K. in Support of Sterling 1. The austerity program imposed by the British last year brought sterling out of its summer crisis and very considerable gains were made in restoring British reserves and repaying short-term credits. This favorable picture prevailed through the fourth quarter of last year and into April of 1967. The British predicted a sizable balance of payments surplus for the year. A sharp reversal took place in May, following poor April trade figures, accentuated by the Mid-East crisis. The British reserves suffered from some movement of Mid-East funds accompanied by other speculative flight from sterling and more fundamentally due to closure of the Suez canal and related aspects of the Mid-East crisis. In addition, the hoped for resurgence in U. K. exports did not take place, due in large part to the stagnation in Germany and slow downs elsewhere, including the U.S. in the early part of the year. Finally, interest arbitrage relationships were turned against the British as interest rates in the United States rose. As a result, the British again find themselves with reserves depleted and large debts on their short-term lines of credit. Their reserves at the end of September stood at $2,733 million, down $425 million from a year earlier and short-term credits drawn at $2,072 million, up $250 million from a year earlier. This $2.1 billion of credits drawn is out of established short-term lines totaling $2,690 million leaving about $620 million remaining. Of the $2,690 million in credit lines, $1,750 million have been extended by the United States and the balance of $940 million by other, largely European, countries. The worsening of the short-term credit position has to a large extent been offset by reestablishment of medium-term facilities with the International Monetary Fund, but these latter are not as readily available and publicity surrounding an IMF drawing could be counterproductive. At present the United States has two credit lines, one a swap line by the Federal Reserve amounting to $1,350 million of which $800 million is drawn and a $400 million agreement shared $200 million by the Federal Reserve and $200 million by the Treasury Exchange Stabilization Fund. Under this latter agreement the U.S. extends support by purchasing sterling generally in the market, subject to an exchange guarantee granted by the British. There is no fixed maturity at which the sterling will be resold to the Bank of England or the market. The Exchange Stabilization Fund also extends, on occasion, overnight assistance at month end. 2. The drain on the British position in the past few months, after the Mid-East crisis settled down, seems to be largely related to the fact that interest rates elsewhere, particularly in the Euro-dollar market, are more attractive than rates on sterling investments when the cost of forward cover is taken into account. In addition, their trade figures have not been a cause of encouragement. Given the other problems of sterling, this drain is unsustainable. The increase today in the Bank of England rate of 1/2 percent is designed to reestablish the interest relationship which existed earlier. It may well prove to be not enough and another 1/2 percent increase could be around the corner. In response to an inquiry by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, I have indicated the United States would not stand in the way of or retaliate to such a move. We could not, of course, make any promise as to the general trend of our own rates. The Bank of England had moved its rate down by 1-1/2 percent to 5-1/2 percent earlier this year (1/2 percent each in January, March and May). The United States reduced its rate by 1/2 percent in April. 3. We wish to take advantage of what may be a favorable psychological moment to assist in a strengthening of the exchange rate for the pound sterling or at the least to lend sufficient support to avoid a worsening of the outlook. To this end we would propose to engage in market operations by buying guaranteed sterling under the aforementioned $400 million agreement of September 1965. 4. With your approval, we agreed to extend the further $400 million assistance in September 1965. At that time we succeeded in obtaining additional pledges of assistance, known as the Basle agreement, from the European central banks. This is the present credit line of $690 million of which the British have now used $540 million. A further credit package in the amount of $300 million, of which a group of foreign central banks would supply $275 million, is being currently discussed to assist the U.K. to make a repayment due to the International Monetary Fund this December. It is not sure as yet, however, whether this additional credit will materialize. Therefore additional assistance by the United States may not be matched by others. 5. In connection with any current market operations, it would be helpful to have some more ammunition available now to reinforce their position. At present the Exchange Stabilization Fund has only $50 million left unused from its pledge of $200 million under the September 1965 agreement. The Federal Reserve has $110 million left but, as noted, already has undertaken assistance of $800 million under its swap line. 6. Following the weekend developments, I convened a meeting Tuesday morning of the ad hoc group we normally call on to consider the U.K. problems and our role in dealing with them. It included, in addition to Treasury personnel, Mr. Fried of your staff, Chairman Martin and Governor Daane of the Federal Reserve Board, Mr. Okun of the Council of Economic Advisers, Assistant Secretary Solomon of the State Department, and Mr. Charles Coombs of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who acts as our agent in the market. We reviewed the overall U. K. situation, the various alternatives open, the risk of devaluation, and the situation in the gold market. After pooling our information and views, this ad hoc group referred a general proposal along the lines of this paper to the Interagency Steering Group operating under the Chairmanship of Under Secretary Deming of the Treasury. That group met on Wednesday and considered the problem at some length. In light of the above, I recommend that you authorize me to increase the Exchange Stabilization portion of the September 1965 agreement by $100 million to $300 million. Sterling purchased under this authority would, of course, have to be subject to guarantee so that no exchange risk would be incurred. There would be no adverse balance of payments effect from the transaction. Henry H. Fowler
