FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 149
149. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson
Date: 1967-11-11
SUBJECT: Balance of Payments Program Announcement
Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Balance of Payments, Vol.

Attached is Secretary Fowler's memo recommending a schedule of announcements and actions regarding the balance of payments.

The main immediate issue is the announcement of 1968 guidelines for the Commerce and Federal Reserve voluntary programs restraining foreign direct investments and bank credits. These should be announced as soon as possible so as to affect planning for next year by corporations and banks. Fowler proposes to do so at a press conference he would hold on Friday, November 17, with Trowbridge and Governor Robertson of the Fed. At the same time he will release the third quarter balance of payments figures-which will not make good reading. I believe you should also announce earlier the same day, as Fowler suggests, appointment of the new Travel Task Force so that Fowler at his press conference can refer to it as another action designed to help our balance of payments.

Fowler also proposes for possible release by December 1 a special report on the Balance of Payments-what we have been doing, where we are, and where we propose to go in dealing with the balance of payments. Your Cabinet Committee briefly discussed and supported the general idea.

I believe the third recommendation-to defer a message recommending elimination of the gold cover-makes sense at this time. But we will have to look at this one carefully over the next two months in conjunction with developments in dealing with current pressures on sterling and with unsettled conditions in the gold market.

The fourth recommendation asks you to defer a balance of payments message now and submit it early next session. The message would be built on a good export expansion package-which is now being developed.

I concur in the four recommendations in Secretary Fowler's cover memo.

Attachment Washington, November 09, 1967. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Fowler to President Johnson SUBJECT Balance of Payments Program Announcement This memorandum deals with the proposed schedule for handling our 1968 balance of payments program announcements. It involves somewhat of a revision of the plans discussed at the time of my August 8 memorandum to you. In the light of intervening developments and current circumstances, to be discussed, I would recommend now that: (1) There be an announcement on Friday, November 17, of the Commerce Department guidelines for 1968 as well as the new Federal Reserve Board guidelines in a joint press conference in which Secretary Trowbridge, Governor Robertson and I would participate. At the same time I am planning to announce the third quarter balance of payments figures. This is a quarterly release and I only have a one or two day leeway on the date. On September 21 you met with Secretary Trowbridge, Mr. Field and me and approved the Commerce Department program for 1968. I do not believe we will find it necessary to involve you in any meeting on the Federal Reserve Board voluntary program which we expect to iron out finally at a Cabinet Committee meeting on Thursday, November 9. If you wish, there could be a simultaneous release on the day of the press conference announcing the voluntary programs and the new Travel Task Force. Approve with simultaneous announcement of Travel Task Force Approve without simultaneous announcement of Travel Task Force Approve Disapprove (2) As Chairman of the Cabinet Committee on Balance of Payments, I submit on December 1 for public release a rather lengthy, detailed report: (a) reciting in some detail all that we have been doing and are doing to deal with our balance of payments problem, and (b) describing in some detail the background and elements of a long-range program on which the Cabinet Committee has been working which would serve as a backdrop for a later Presidential Balance of Payments Message featuring concrete proposals on an export expansion program early in January. Approve Disapprove Approve as modified (3) That you defer sending a Message at this time recommending the elimination of the gold cover requirement. Approve Disapprove Approve as modified (4) That instead of submitting a Balance of Payments Message this fall toward the end of this session, you submit it as a separate Message very early in the next session. Approve Disapprove Approve as modified For your information in considering these recommendations, I am submitting an attached background memorandum. Henry H. Fowler

Attachment BACKGROUND MEMORANDUM At the time of my August 8 memorandum to you and our meeting on August 10, we considered tentatively the presentation of a 1968 and long-range balance of payments program in a mid-September Message to the Congress requesting removal of the gold cover or the separate submission of a Balance of Payments Message later in this fall. Subsequent events have caused a change in that procedure. These include the delay and deferment of action on the tax bill which is a centerpiece for any meaningful balance of payments program in 1968 or the future, the emergence of an increasingly serious threat to the pound and a highly unsettled and precarious condition in the gold market, and the inability of the Cabinet Committee machinery to arrive in timely fashion on agreed recommendations for a truly meaningful and significant expansion of our balance of payments program. Another consideration which I will relate to you orally also prompted me to defer requesting you to send forward a Message on eliminating the gold cover. It also underscores the desirability of a public report along the lines recommended. Given these developments it seems wise to change our planned procedure to the pattern outlined in the cover memorandum. These are some of the elements of the background for the recommendations in the memorandum to which this is attached: (1) Need to make voluntary program announcement no later than middle of November. It is necessary to release publicly the guidelines for the Commerce Department voluntary program and the Federal Reserve Board voluntary program so that the elements of the private sector affected may crank the guidance into their forward planning for next year. It is desirable to have the Commerce Department guidelines out so that Secretary Trowbridge and his colleagues can begin a series of individual conferences with companies which appear to be out of line. Originally these figures have come out in the first and second week of December and I think this has been late. In fact, November 17-which is the date recommended in the memorandum to which this is attached-is a little later than the date I was originally hoping for. (2) Balance of payments outlook. In the first half of 1967 we were running along at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about a $2 billion deficit. The third quarter has deteriorated and the prospects for the fourth quarter are no better. While in 1965 and 1966 we had liquidity deficits of $1.3 and $1.4 billion, we could double that level this year or end up with a deficit of around $2.6 billion despite the benefit from a sizeable amount of "Special Transactions" we have been able to negotiate on a temporary basis. It may be even worse, depending upon developments with respect to sterling and the impact these developments have on our own position. (In this regard, we may have some option as to whether to take a few hundred million dollars adverse effect of British actions in the fourth quarter of 1967 or in 1968. While it is our general feeling that it might be better to take it this year-and we can attribute it to the British-our thinking has been influenced by what we see as poor balance of payments prospects for 1968 in the $3 billion range.) These large deficits-a return to the unacceptable levels of 1964 and 1965-underscore as nothing else could underscore the necessity of providing clear and positive stimulants to our industry, that is to those elements which produce the surplus which the Government must have to be able to achieve our international objectives in terms of the defense umbrella we provide, as well as the investment and economic assistance we provide. These deficits also emphasize the crucial necessity in achieving any long-term equilibrium of neutralizing the foreign exchange costs of our military expenditures in NATO and the Far East to provide financial viability for the long term maintenance of our presence in those areas. (3) IMF review. The International Monetary Fund sits down with the Government once a year to go over in considerable detail our economic and balance of payments policies and positions. These sessions are scheduled for November 27-30 this year and starting on the 28th or 29th they will focus primarily on our balance of payments posture and program. I would like very much to have the background elements for our program in the public domain by that time even though the implementing Message to Congress on the export expansion program is not before the Congress. (4) The special need for a positive export expansion program at the next session. It has been my position for some time that the whole thrust of our long-term U.S. balance of payments program must concentrate on accentuating the positive; that is, encouraging additional exports as well as receipts from direct investments abroad, increased foreign travel in the United States and increased foreign investment in the United States, while containing excessive balance of payments outflow of both the private sector and the government alike. You underscored this in your May 23 statement. At that time you asked Secretary Trowbridge and the Cabinet Committee on Balance of Payments to undertake a far-reaching export study. On June 28, I held a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Balance of Payments at which there were reviewed and approved in the broadest terms the thrust and major areas of the 1968 program. Since that time we have been developing this in detail. In the meantime, with the Kennedy Round behind us and the prospect for five years of periodic tariff reduction and with the increasing pressure of protectionism on the home front which could thwart the advance of the Kennedy Round, it seems very much in our interest to describe now and advance early in the session a positive export expansion program. The program elements we have developed include: -Non-tax incentives, administered by the Commerce Department, focusing upon small and medium sized corporations, designed to assist them in selling overseas. -Tax measures, including both administrative and legislative features, which would make exporting much more attractive. This is the keystone of our program-it would serve to create jobs at home and be the incentive for additional efforts in exporting. -Financing designed to make export financing more attractive to the private community. We have a couple of administrative measures we can take as well as ones requiring legislative action. The Export-Import Bank figures very prominently in this area and the full cooperation of Mr. Linder will be necessary to achieve these objectives. -The GATT. It is time for a positive and outward looking re-examination of those provisions of the GATT which are trade restrictive in their nature. These provisions may be trade restrictive in the sense of (1) what a country can do when it is in balance of payments deficits, and they may be trade restrictive; (2) in the area of non-tariff barrier practices; as well as (3) the permissible subsidies which act preferentially for one tax system (EEC, Japan, United Kingdom) and discriminate against a country using another tax system (U.S.). A review of this type is totally in keeping with the 20th anniversary of GATT and falls in perfect stride with the post-Kennedy Round situation. This would provide another occasion to demonstrate to the world at large and to our protectionists at home that we will use trade expansive and not trade restrictive measures and the rules of the game must be brought up to date to assure this.
