FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 202
202. Current Economic Developments
Date: 1968-07-30
Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

EXIMBANK GIVEN MORE LIBERAL EXPORT FINANCING AUTHORITY

The President on July 8 signed into law a bill which breaks new ground in export financing by the Eximbank. The law authorizes the Bank to use up to $500 million of its existing $13.5 billion commitment authority to support export transactions which carry a higher degree of risk than is permitted under the Bank's present statute. The President will establish an Export Expansion Advisory Committee to provide guidance to the Eximbank with regard to the use of this facility.

Purpose of New Authority

The new legislation is a part of President Johnson's program designed to reduce the deficit in our balance of payments. In his January 1 b/p message the President said: "I shall ... ask the Congress to earmark $500 million of the Export-Import Bank authorization to: provide better export insurance, expand guarantees for export financing, and broaden the scope of Government financing for exports." The President elaborated further in his letter to the Senate and House transmitting the bill requesting such authorization. He said that the requested $500 million allocation would support the determined efforts of the entire business community to expand exports, assist American firms which now sell only within the US to expand their markets and send their goods abroad, and make available to American firms export financing more competitive with that provided by other major trading nations and especially suited to developing new markets.

The legislation seeks to achieve these objectives by authorizing the Eximbank to support export transactions which give promise of helping our b/p and promoting the long-term commercial interests of the US, but which do not necessarily meet the Eximbank's statutory standard of "reasonable assurances of repayment." The law provides broader criteria for a limited volume of Eximbank guarantees, insurance, and credits. It does not entail any increase in the current $13.5 billion lending authority of the Bank.

Advisory Committee

To achieve the greatest benefit from the export financing plan, the President will establish an Export Expansion Advisory Committee, chaired by the Secretary of Commerce, to provide guidance to the Board of Directors of the Eximbank. The Committee will be established by an Executive Order which will indicate the Committee's membership and outline in broad terms the function of the Committee.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]
