FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 225
225. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to Secretary of State Rusk
Date: 1964-01-15
Source: Department of State, Central Files, FT (EX) US.

Dear Dean:

As you know, President Johnson has signed the attached Executive Order creating an interdepartmental, cabinet-level committee on export expansion, to be chaired by the Secretary of Commerce.

On December 20, 1963, the President appointed Daniel L. Goldy (of Oregon) National Export Expansion Coordinator. Under the terms of the Executive Order, I have appointed Mr. Goldy to be Executive Director of the Committee.

This Interdepartmental Committee has been created to facilitate the coordination of the policies and programs of the Federal Government designed to expand the U.S. share of world markets. The problem of increasing U.S. exports has come to a sharp focus due to our persistently unfavorable balance of payments. In addition, every effort should be made to increase U.S. sales abroad so as to stimulate our domestic economy and to create additional jobs here at home. While the Department of Commerce has a primary responsibility for promoting the foreign commerce of the United States, other departments and agencies of government also have vital roles to play in this endeavor.

The Interdepartmental Committee and the National Export Expansion Coordinator will strive for maximum coordination of the policies and programs of the Federal Government in pursuit of our foreign trade objectives.

The White House Conference on Export Expansion, which was held on September 17 and 18, 1963 and attended by close to 300 leading businessmen resulted in a series of recommendations on export promotion. Many of these recommendations can be implemented by individual Departments. Others require joint action or coordination of Departmental policies. One of the functions of the Interdepartmental Committee, and a major responsibility of the National Export Expansion Coordinator, is to encourage and assist the relevant Departments and agencies to put into effect promptly as many of those recommendations as possible.

I will be calling a meeting soon and, meanwhile, I would appreciate it if you would have a member of your staff prepare a review of what your agency does or contemplates doing along export expansion lines so that the Coordinator and members of our Cabinet Committee may be kept informed.

In the future, Mr. Goldy will make every effort to cooperate fully with you or whomever you designate concerning these important programs.

Sincerely yours,
