FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 245
245. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts
Date: 1964-08-03
Source: Department of State, Central Files, FT 13-2 US.

202. Action addressees should inform government officials that U.S. believes, with end UNCTAD, time seems appropriate make special effort stimulate interest of less developed countries in the practical advantages to their trade and development of active and full participation Kennedy Round. U.S. therefore intends to initiate bilateral discussions with selected LDC's to discuss importance and potentialities of their active participation in KR, the work of the GATT Trade Negotiation Committee (TNC) and Sub-Committee on LDC Participation and the nature of their possible contribution to trade liberalization in the negotiations.

Ambassador Blumenthal will initiate U.S. effort August 19 to September 2 by visiting Rio, Buenos Aires and Lima for high level discussions. Consideration being given to consulting with Pakistanis and Indians in Europe rather than through visits to Karachi and New Delhi.

To stimulate more African interest in GATT, also planning have U.S. Econ. Min. Geneva John Evans visit Cairo, Lagos and a French speaking African country at later date.

U.S. concern is that concentration of most LDC officials on far-reaching objectives at UNCTAD in past months diverted their attention from the more conventional but attainable trade benefits possible during KR. U.S. therefore wishes encourage as many LDC's as possible to participate in the negotiations and be active in LDC Sub-Committee. During UNCTAD, U.S. and other developed countries unable support many LDC proposals but repeatedly stressed genuine interest promoting LDC exports and U.S. pledged maximum effort KR achieve this objective. But this requires that LDC's participate and preferably pursue energetic course in both preparatory and negotiation stages.

U.S. wishes not only inform host governments of U.S. views and intention initiate bilateral discussions with these LDC's but also seek host governments instruct their missions in LDC capitals to encourage more active LDC participation in KR. In this respect U.S. recognizes that African countries present special problems. KR benefits for them less evident and will require greater coordination of effort by all developed countries. For our part U.S. is studying ways and means of developing constructive approach and would welcome cooperation in this effort.
