FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 248
248. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Legislative Reference, Bureau of the Budget (Hughes) to President Johnson
Date: 1964-08-21
SUBJECT: Enrolled Bill H.R. 1839-Free importation of certain wild animals and birds and imposition of quotas on the importation of certain meats; Sponsor-Rep. Teague (R) California
Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade-General, vol.

Last Day for Action

Purpose

To provide for the free importation of certain wild animals, and to provide for the imposition of quotas on fresh, chilled, or frozen meat of cattle, goats and sheep (except lambs).

Agency Recommendations

Bureau of the Budget-Approval Department of Agriculture-No objection Department of State-No objection Department of Commerce-No objection Office of Special Representative for Trade Negotiations-No objection (informally) Department of the Treasury-No recommendation Tariff Commission-No recommendation Council of Economic Advisers-No recommendation (informally)

Discussion

Section 1 of this bill would permit the duty-free entry of wild animals and birds which would be imported for sale to any public zoo. Existing law permits such duty-free entry when the creatures are actually imported by a zoo but not when the zoo purchases them from an importer. By making the creatures duty-free in either case, this bill would permit zoos to escape the risks of transportation and death by purchasing the creatures duty-free from importers who can spread such risks over a larger volume of imports. Duty-free treatment would not be afforded to animals purchased by private or "roadside" zoos.

Section 2 of this bill establishes as Congressional policy an annual quota on fresh, chilled, or frozen beef, veal, goat meat, and mutton. Annual imports of these items would be limited to 725.4 million pounds-the annual average of such imports for 1959 through 1963. This limit would be increased or decreased for any particular year in proportion to the change in domestic production.

When it is determined that imports will exceed by ten per cent the limits set by this policy, the President would be required to issue a proclamation which would keep imports from exceeding such limits. Under certain circumstances, however, the limitation would be removed when it is determined that anticipated imports will not exceed by ten per cent the limits set by Congressional policy.

The President would be authorized to suspend or increase any quota if he determines and proclaims that: (1) overriding economic or national security interests of the United States require such action; (2) the supply of meat will be inadequate to satisfy domestic demand at reasonable prices; or (3) trade agreements entered into after the date of the enactment of this bill insure that the Congressional policy will be carried out.

With regard to meat, this bill differs from the version that was passed by the Senate and strongly opposed by the Administration principally in that the types of meats covered are fewer, and certain discretionary authority to adjust or suspend quotas is permitted the President.

It may be noted that although the State Department and the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations do not recommend veto of this bill, they do indicate that they are opposed to it.
