FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 253
253. Letter From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to Secretary of the Treasury Dillon
Date: 1964-10-26
Source: Kennedy Library, Herter Papers, White House Subject File, Withdrawn Documents, Box 15, Box 5.

Dear Doug:

I am enclosing my preliminary recommendations to the President concerning those import items which I believe should be placed on the United States exceptions list, that is, reserved from a full 50% reduction in duties in the forthcoming trade negotiations. In some cases, which are noted in my recommendations, I am proposing a reduction of less than 50%, and in all other cases, no reduction at all.

For the most part, I have accepted the recommendations of the Trade Executive Committee, which concluded its deliberations on the exceptions list last week. I have not accepted its recommendations with respect to the following items:

Hardwood Plywood (TSUS 240.14, ex 240.18, and ex 240.20) Hardboard (TSUS 245.10 and 245.20) Woven Silk Fabrics (TSUS 337.10 and 337.90)

At the end of my recommendations you will find a summary of the proposed exceptions and an identification of the countries whose trade with the United States would be primarily affected by such exceptions. In reviewing my preliminary recommendations, you may wish to refer to the documents which record the deliberations and decisions of the Trade Executive Committee and which have been sent to your Department's representative on that Committee.

In order to facilitate our meeting on November 5th, I would ask that you notify me and the other members of the Trade Expansion Act Advisory Committee of any import items which you intend to raise for discussion at that meeting. This notification should, I believe, be accompanied by a brief written statement of justification.

As mentioned in my letter of October 16th, I would be delighted to meet with you at any time before our meeting of November 5th, should you personally wish to discuss with me any aspect of my preliminary recommendations to the President.

Most sincerely yours,
