FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 282
282. Letter From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations' Executive Assistant (Auchincloss) to the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter)
Date: 1965-04-14
Source: Kennedy Library, Herter Papers, Kenneth Auchincloss, Box 5.

Dear Governor:

I hope this will be my last report by letter and that you will be back next week. We all miss you, and I hope I'm not betraying any secrets by reporting that Cady had her hair done especially in preparation for her trip to see you today.

1. Cereals. Irwin has sent you a report on the exporters' meetings last week, so I won't try to elaborate. As for the timing of the negotiations, the EEC Council takes up the Commission's cereals proposal again on May 13, and Hijzen says they will make this into a marathon session if necessary in order to reach agreement. We are urging them strongly to hold to the date of May 17 for the start of cereals negotiations, even though this means that countries will have little chance to study the various proposals by that time since they will not be laid on the table until sometime between May 13-17. 2. Adjustment Assistance. Senator Hartke has introduced a bill that would loosen somewhat the criteria that must be met for firms or workers to qualify for adjustment assistance under the Trade Expansion Act. Instead of the tariff concession having to be the "major" cause of increased imports and "increased" imports the cause of serious injury, the bill would require only that the concession be "in whole or in part responsible" for the increased imports and that the increased imports be "the predominant factor" in causing injury. The criteria for escape clause relief would remain unchanged, so the bill would have the effect of making adjustment assistance easier to get than escape clause action. We are now discussing within the Office whether the Executive should support the bill. It really comes down to a question of whether the danger that the escape clause criteria might be loosened in the legislative process outweighs the danger that the trade legislation in general and the escape clause in particular would face heavy political sledding in 1967 if the adjustment assistance provisions remain completely inoperative. 3. Wyndham White Visit. Wyndham White has tentative plans to come to Washington in the last week of this month. If the trip is confirmed, we will make arrangements for him to see a number of people in various agencies and in Congress. 4. Canadian Auto Parts Bill. Chairman Mills has just announced that he plans to take up the auto parts bill at the end of April. After that will come the $50 duty-free exemption for tourists, and only then the Revised Tariff Schedules bill. The much-battered RTS bill takes it on the chin again.

Very best regards,
