FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 313
313. Final Report by the United States
Date: 1966-07-09
Source: Department of State, Central Files, FT 13-2 US.

UNITED STATES TARIFF CLASSIFICATION

Final Report by the United States on the Negotiations under Article XXVIII on the Revised Tariff Schedules of the United States

The United States has reached the agreement envisaged by Article XXVIII with all thirty-five contracting parties which had negotiating rights under that article in relation to the application of rate increases involved in the revised Tariff Schedules of the United States and the eventual certification of a consolidated Schedule XX in terms of such revised tariff. This is, therefore, the final report in accordance with the Decision of June 30, 1965.

It will be recalled that the United States Government informed the Contracting Parties on 14 March 1966 (L/2592) that interim agreements had been signed with twenty-five contracting parties. Since the submission of the progress report of 14 March 1966, negotiations have been completed and agreements signed with Japan, South Africa and the United Kingdom. The settlements with Japan and the United Kingdom were similar to the agreement with Canada in that the United States made compensatory rate reductions.

With respect to the two remaining negotiations, with Sweden and the European Economic Community, joint letters have been submitted to the Secretariat providing for, subject to the continuation of negotiations, the substitution during the period prior to January 1, 1967 of United States concessions in terms of the new Tariff Schedules of the United States for concessions in the existing Schedule XX in which the EEC or its member states and Sweden have negotiating rights under Article XXVIII.

The United States will prepare as soon as possible a consolidated Schedule XX for review by the Contracting Parties.

A list of the countries with which agreements have been concluded is attached.

Attachment Agreements Concluded by the United States with: Australia Austria Brazil Canada Ceylon Chile Denmark Dominican Republic European Economic Community Finland Greece Haiti India Indonesia Israel Japan New Zealand Nicaragua Norway Pakistan Peru Portugal Rhodesia South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Uruguay
