FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 329
329. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson
Date: 1967-01-03
SUBJECT: Replacement for Governor Herter
Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Bator Memos [2 of 2], Box 1.

Negotiations in Geneva will be reaching a climax during the next two or three months. It seems to me important to avoid any appearance of a vacuum in the Herter office during the hard bargaining to come. I think it is important that you make clear who will be in charge.

The choices are: 1. Elevate Governor Herter's deputy, William Roth, who now has the title of Deputy Special Representative (with the rank of Ambassador). 2. Let Roth act as Special Representative, but without your appointing him. (The TEA empowers the Deputy to act in these circumstances.) 3. Appoint someone else to succeed Herter.

As you know, I have kept a close eye on the Kennedy Round during the past 3 years, and have come to know well the people, and the workings of the Herter staff. This experience leads me strongly to recommend choice No. 1: appointment of Bill Roth as your Special Representative.

During the past year and a half-ever since the Governor's health deteriorated-Bill has been the effective day-to-day chief of the organization. He has done a superb job, both in managing the organization and in handling relations with the business community and the Congress. He has good and close relations with Wilbur Mills and others on the Hill who have shown an interest in the negotiations.

Appointing someone from the outside-just six months before the windup of the negotiations-could be damaging in terms of the continued effectiveness of a good, tightly knit organization. It would be difficult for an outsider to acquire the intimate knowledge of the details of the negotiations which will be needed during the February-March period in Geneva. In any case, I know of no one who would be competent to take on this job on short notice who could give you the political protection with protectionist Republicans you got from Herter.

Appointing Bill-rather than letting him serve as acting Special Representative-would not limit your choice beyond the end of the Kennedy Round in June. Bill is determined to get out of the trade negotiation business, and would not be prepared to stay in the Herter job beyond June. There are strong pressures on him to leave Government-personal business as well as the University of California, where he is a key member of the Board of Regents. (I think he might stay in Washington if an attractive offer were available outside of the trade field. He has clearly had enough of chicken wars, hassles over safety-pin duties, etc.)

I think it is very important that we move on this quickly, and give a clear signal of Presidential support for Roth, his organization, and the U.S. team in Geneva. I am confident that Rusk, Connor and Freeman would support the promotion of Roth. If you wish, I can check. I did not want to restrict your choices by telephoning around before a signal from you.
