FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 361
361. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs' Special Assistant (Enders) to Secretary of State Rusk
Date: 1967-05-16
SUBJECT: Kennedy Round Briefing at the Capitol, Room S-126, 9:30 A.M. and 10:30 A.M.
Source: Department of State, Central Files, FT 13-2 US.

As you know, Bill Roth has brought off a handsome deal in Geneva. Its basic structure is: -Concessions on $7-1/2 to $8 billion of US exports and the same volume of US imports. -Average cuts of 33-35% in industry. -Important concessions in agriculture. -Strict bilateral balance with the EEC; slightly short of balance with the British; a net plus with the Nordics; short with Japan; a very significant-in some ways brilliant-deal with Canada; overall balance with the rich countries even in terms of our most conservative numbers. -4-1/2 million tons of food aid; a major breakthrough in feeding the hungry. (Japan is still not clearly in-or out, for that matter). -A good deal on chemicals in the Kennedy Round, unprejudiced by the ASP package to be put to Congress.

One caveat: not only is there a vast amount of mopping up to do in Geneva, but legally we won't have a deal until the President (and other governments) sign off. There is no need to emphasize the distinction, but it has to be kept in mind.

Tab A gives the specifics of the package, as far as we now know them. Tab B is the Vice President's revised talking points. Tab C is a draft Presidential Statement now in the White House mill.

We gave you yesterday some talking points on the political meanings of the negotiation. In the end our bargaining partners-the EEC, Canada, and the Nordics in particular, Britain also-went far to meet our demands. Apparently Jean Rey for the EEC performed exceptionally well, and in the end got strong backing from the member states, France included.

Bill Roth stresses the need to recognize these efforts publicly and build an atmosphere of good feeling around them. You may wish to speak to this point also on the Hill.

Tab A Washington, May 16, 1967. GENERAL RESULTS OF THE KENNEDY ROUND While a great many details are still to be worked out, the general outline of the Kennedy Round agreement is clear. It consists of the elements discussed below. Overall Balance In overall trade terms and taking both industry and agriculture, the tariff cuts made by the U.S. are in balance with those of the other industrialized countries. The United States is giving tariff cuts on about $7-1/2-$8 billion of industrial and agricultural imports and is obtaining tariff concessions on about the same amount of U.S. exports. In industry, the U.S. and the other countries have agreed on cuts averaging between 33-35%. In agriculture, the average cut is less but the United States has obtained important concessions covering a substantial volume of trade. Country-by-Country Balance With the EEC, the U.S. is roughly in balance on a trade coverage basis in the industrial sector. In the agricultural sector, the balance is somewhat in our favor, with the EEC giving the U.S. concessions averaging about 15%, with a significant range of products covered. With the U.K., we are somewhat short of balance overall; with the other EFTA countries the balance is in our favor. With Japan, the overall results are satisfactory although complete balance on a trade coverage basis is not possible. This is largely due to the fact that 44% of our exports to Japan are already duty-free. With Canada, we have a significant bargain involving substantial cuts on $1.3-1.4 billion on trade on each side. Almost half of our concessions involve eliminating duties of less than 5%, while most of Canada's reductions are on duties of 25% or more. With the so-called "borderline countries"-such as Australia, New Zealand, Spain, Portugal, and Israel-negotiations even in broad terms are still continuing. We will probably have some imbalance with these countries, principally because they benefit as secondary suppliers from U.S. tariff reductions granted to the major participants. Grains Agreement The Grains Agreement establishes a minimum price for ordinary wheat at $1.73 a bushel (23# above the minimum now in the International Wheat Agreement) and a maximum of $2.13--or a range of 40#. However, the prevailing world price for ordinary wheat is now above $1.73 and is expected to stay above that level for the next three years. The agreement calls for a food-aid package of 4.5 million tons of grains each year for three years. The U.S. will contribute 42%, the EEC 23%, Canada 9%, and Australia, the U.K. and Japan each 5%. 4.5 million tons is the equivalent of $350 million a year-ten times the value of the annual FAO program. Importing countries will contribute 2 million tons per year ($150 million) which will help make room for U.S. commercial exports. The grains agreement lasts for three years. It does not affect in any way our rights under the so-called "Standstill Agreement" with the EEC, nor our right to the zero binding given by the U.K. Non-Grain Agricultural Products Returns in this sector are quite incomplete. With the EEC, the balance is slightly in our favor in the non-grains sector. In this sector, we are giving concessions to the EEC on such items as canned hams and Turkish-type tobacco-but not fresh or frozen meats, dairy products, or wines. In return, we are getting concessions on such items as tobacco, canned vegetables, and such meat products as tallow, offals, and canned poultry. In our non-grain negotiations with countries other than the EEC, we are acquiring valuable concessions, as on fresh fruits and vegetables from Canada, and on fish products from Canada and Japan. Chemicals In the first package, which will be part of the overall agreement of tariff concessions, the U.S. will make tariff cuts averaging about 42%. The EEC, U.K., and Japan will make cuts which combined average 25%-30%. On this basis we have a balance in our favor in the chemical sector. In the second package, the U.S. agrees to seek legislation eliminating ASP and establishing new duties for chemicals at 20%, except for certain drugs at 25% and dyes at 30%. In return, the EEC, U.K., and Japan will make further cuts of 20%-25%. The second package will therefore stand on its own feet. In addition, conditional upon elimination of ASP, the EEC will modify its discriminatory road taxes and the U.K. will make a 20% reduction in the Commonwealth preference on tobacco. Rubber Footwear The U.S. has agreed to eliminate ASP on rubber footwear but to substitute a new compound duty of 20% plus 25# per pound, with the proviso that the combined duty shall not be less than 58%. Textiles With respect to cotton textiles, the extension of the Long-Term Agreement has been agreed to. Moreover, the U.S. has agreed to cuts of no more than 20%. Almost all woolen textiles have been excepted from negotiation. However, a part of the wool textile duties depends upon the U.S. duty on raw wool, which has been the subject of negotiations. It now appears unlikely that Australia will grant concessions significant enough to justify our cutting the raw wool duty. Without such a cut, there will be no cut whatever. With respect to man-made textiles, the average tariff cut by the United States will be 13 per cent, or, if we include the products of the chemical industry, about 20%. A large share of these products were totally excluded from the negotiations. Steel The U.S., EEC and U.K. have agreed on a general harmonization of duties with the U.S. making cuts of less than 10% on the average. This will bring our steel duties to about 6%. Japan is making substantially greater cuts. Aluminum On unwrought or ingot aluminum, the EEC has agreed to bind a duty of 9% and enlarge a tariff quota with a duty of 5%. Accordingly, the U.S. is making a token cut in its duty on ingot. On wrought aluminum, negotiations are continuing. Significant U.S. Exceptions The U.S. excluded the following from the negotiations: Most dairy products Most meats Most wines Many fresh fruits and vegetables Most cigars Most petroleum products Most wool and many man-made textiles Most footwear and gloves Most glass items Watch movements Lead and zinc Carpets Anti-Dumping Code The major negotiating countries, including the U.S., EEC, U.K., Japan, Canada and most EFTA countries, have reached agreement on an anti-dumping code. This code will make the anti-dumping practices of the big trading nations uniform. The code will provide major benefits for U.S. exporters, including provisions for open hearings in foreign countries, and the introduction by Canada of an injury test in dumping cases. The EEC has been in the process of setting up a general dumping regulation for member countries, and this could have been adverse if not nailed down by the new code. On the downside, anti-dumping procedures will be speeded up once action has been deemed necessary. The dumping code will not require new legislation, since it is consistent with present U.S. law.
