FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 49
49. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk
Date: 1965-03-11
SUBJECT: Special Report of the NAC on IMF Quota Increases
Source: Department of State, Central Files, FN 10.

The Treasury Department, supported by State and other U.S. agencies, has taken the lead in working out arrangements for a 25 percent increase in IMF quotas. These arrangements contain measures designed to reduce the impact of the quota increases on the U.S. gold stock.

The attached Special Report (Tab B) explains these arrangements. It emanates from the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems (the NAC) which was set up in 1946 under the Bretton Woods Agreement. The NAC coordinates the United States position on international financial matters, including the IMF. You are a statutory member.

The NAC almost never meets. Its work is handled by a staff committee where E assures State representation on IMF matters. We have examined the Special Report and have no objection to it.

Recommendation

That you sign the transmittal letter (Tab A) to the President and the Congress.

Tab A Washington, March 12, 1965. To the President and to the Congress: The National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems transmits herewith its Special Report on Proposed Increases in Quotas of the International Monetary Fund. The Council recommends the enactment of legislation to authorize an increase in the quota of the United States in the International Monetary Fund by $1,035 million, from $4,125 million to $5,160 million, as part of a general 25 percent increase in Fund quotas under the conditions set forth in the Report. Douglas Dillon Secretary of the Treasury Chairman, National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems Dean Rusk Secretary of State John T. Connor Secretary of Commerce William McC. Martin, Jr. Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Harold F. Linder President and Chairman Export-Import Bank of Washington
