FRUS 1964-1968, Volume VIII, International Monetary and Trade Policy
Document 64
64. Memorandum From President Johnson to Secretary of the Treasury Fowler
Date: 1965-06-16
SUBJECT: Forward Planning in International Finance
Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, International Monetary Reform, President's Instructions-June 1965, Box 12.

It has become clear to me that we must develop policies, covering a considerable period in the future, with respect to the development of the international monetary and payments system and the role of the United States in the system. The actions we have taken to bring our payments into balance will, over time, put substantial pressure on reserves abroad and hence on international trade and the growth of the world economy. The Free World will need some way of systematically producing the additional liquidity which has been supplied by the payments deficits of the United States. This will require international agreements among the nations which are the primary sources of liquidity. I recognize that considerable study has been devoted to these issues by the Long-Range International Payments Committee, chaired by the Treasury. However, I believe that it would now be desirable to push forward with more intensive effort, so as to be fully prepared for full scale negotiations when the time is ripe and right.

In the light of your leading responsibility within the Government for forward planning on international monetary problems, I should like you to organize a small high-level study group to develop and recommend to me-through you, and the other principals directly concerned-a comprehensive U.S. position and negotiating strategy designed to achieve substantial improvement in international monetary arrangements. The Study Group should consist of appropriate senior officials from the Treasury, the State Department, the Council of Economic Advisers, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the White House. I understand that you would have in mind that it would be chaired by the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs.

Without attempting to lay down rigid terms of reference, the following are some of the questions I have in mind: 1. What are the possible means of reducing the United States' vulnerability to political and economic pressure through the threatened conversion into gold of any overhang of official dollar balances? 2. What are the possible and feasible means of assuring that credit will be available to deficit countries in amounts and on terms-maturity, interest, and automaticity-consistent with the realities of the adjustment process in a world of fixed parities where sharp deflation is not an acceptable alternative? 3. How can we assure that the amount of reserve assets will expand at a rate which will facilitate maintenance of full employment, reasonably stable prices, and expansion of world trade? Any revised or new system for creating reserves should insure against the instability inherent in a two-reserve asset or multiple-asset arrangement in which one asset is judged to be absolutely safe in terms of convertibility into the other(s), whereas convertibility the other way is unavoidably judged more uncertain.

The Study Group should explore which of the elements in the various proposed schemes of reform would be acceptable to the United States, which entirely unacceptable, and which might well be appropriate for negotiation.

In considering these questions, I would like the Study Group to take full account of the interrelations between our monetary and economic objectives, and our more general foreign policy objectives. It should explore the entire range of actions open to the United States which would bring to bear our economic strength, and our political strength, to secure reforms which would be desirable in terms of the full range of our object-ives. It should take into account a variety of contingencies with regard to the cooperation of other governments and explore what unilateral steps the United States might take to achieve progress. It should spell out alternatives with respect to timing.

In addition to the above general questions, the Study Group should give urgent and thorough consideration to the special situation of the United Kingdom, which is of major foreign policy concern. Specifically, it should consider what steps the United States could take to arrange for a relief of pressure on sterling, so as to give the United Kingdom the four-or five-year breathing space it needs to get its economy into shape, and thereby sharply reduce the danger of sterling devaluation or exchange controls or British military disengagement East of Suez or on the Rhine.

The Study Group should be small and it should work in the strictest secrecy, with knowledge of its existence and access to its work available on a strict need-to-know basis. Its work would not be a substitute for the continuing work, under your chairmanship, of the Cabinet Committee on the Balance of Payments (and the Executive Committee), the National Advisory Council on International and Financial Problems, and the Long-Range International Payments Committee. It is my desire that these committees continue their valuable work.

I believe it would be useful for you also to establish a panel of consultants, consisting of people outside of Government with broad knowledge in this field, who would be available to you for counsel. This consultant group might also be relatively small and include people from the academic, banking, and business communities. It would be appropriate to include people formerly with the Government, such as Douglas Dillon, Robert Roosa, and Kermit Gordon.

I should like to receive a progress report on the work of the Study Group by August 2, 1965, and from time to time as appropriate. In addition, I shall expect periodically to meet with you and the other officials concerned to discuss the problems and prospects.
